123Bipolar and
 Related Disorders
Bipolar and related  disorders are separated from  the depressive disorders in
DSM-5 and placed between the chapters on schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders and depressive disord ers in recognition of their place as a bridge between the
two diagnostic classes in terms of symptomato logy, family history, and genetics. The di-
agnoses included in this chapter are bipola r I disorder, bipolar II disorder, cyclothymic
disorder, substance/medication-induced bipo lar and related disorder, bipolar and relat-
ed disorder due to another medical condition, other specified bipolar and related disor-
der, and unspecified bipolar and related disorder.
The bipolar I disorder criter ia represent the modern understanding of the classic
manic-depressive disorder or affective psycho sis described in the ni neteenth century, dif-
fering from that classic description only to th e extent that neither psychosis nor the lifetime
experience of a major depressive episode is a requirement. However, the vast majority of
individuals whose symptoms meet the criter ia for a fully syndromal manic episode also
experience major depressive episodes during the course of their lives.
Bipolar II disorder, requiring the lifetime experience of at least one episode of major de-
pression and at least one hypomanic episode, is no longer thought to be a “milder” condition
than bipolar I disorder, largely because of th e amount of time individuals with this con-
dition spend in depression and because the in stability of mood experienced by individuals
with bipolar II disorder is typically accompanied by serious impairment in work and social
functioning.
The diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder is give n to adults who experience at least 2 years
(for children, a full year) of both hypomanic and depressive periods without ever fulfilling
the criteria for an episode of mani a, hypomania, or major depression.
A large number of substances of abuse, some prescribed medi cations, and several
medical conditions can be associated with manic-like phenomena. This fact is recognized
in the diagnoses of substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and bipo-
lar and related disorder due to another medical condition.
The recognition that many individuals, partic ularly children and, to a lesser extent, ad-
olescents, experience bipolar-like phenomena that  do not meet the criteria for bipolar I, bi-
polar II, or cyclothymic disorder is reflected in the availability of the other specified
bipolar and related disorder category. Indeed, specific criteria for a disorder involving
short-duration hypomania are provided in Section III in the hope of encouraging further
study of this disorder.
Bipolar I Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
For a diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, it is nece ssary to meet the following criteria for a manic
episode. The manic episode may have been preceded by and may be followed by hypo-
manic or major depressive episodes.
124 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Manic Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
and abnormally and persistently increased goal-d irected activity or energy, lasting at
least 1 week and present most of the day, nearly every day (or any duration if hospi-
talization is necessary).
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy or activity, three (or
more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) are present to a sig-
nificant degree and represent a notic eable change from usual behavior: 
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily dr awn to unimportant or irrelevant external
stimuli), as reported or observed.
6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or
psychomotor agitation (i.e., purposeless non-goal-directed activity).
7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful conse-
quences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buyin g sprees, sexual indiscretions, or
foolish business investments).
C. The mood disturbance is sufficiently severe to cause marked impairment in social or
occupational functioning or to necessitate hospitalization to prevent harm to self or oth-
ers, or there are psychotic features.
D. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
of abuse, a medication, other treatm ent) or to another medical condition.
Note:  A full manic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g., medi-
cation, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond the
physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a manic episode and,
therefore, a bipolar I diagnosis.
Note:  Criteria A–D constitute a manic episode. At least one lifetime manic episode is re-
quired for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
Hypomanic Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at least 4 consec-
utive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
B. During the period of mood disturbance and increased energy and activity, three (or
more) of the following symptoms (four if the mood is only irritable) have persisted, rep-
resent a noticeable change from usual behavior, and have been present to a significant
degree:
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily dr awn to unimportant or irrelevant external
stimuli), as reported or observed.
6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or
psychomotor agitation.
7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful conse-
quences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buyin g sprees, sexual indiscretions, or
foolish business investments).
Bipolar I Disorder 125
C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning that is uncharac-
teristic of the individual when not symptomatic.
D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable by others.
E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or occupa-
tional functioning or to necessitate hospitalization. If there are psychotic features, the
episode is, by definition, manic.
F. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
of abuse, a medication, other treatment).
Note:  A full hypomanic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g.,
medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond
the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a hypomanic episode
diagnosis. However, caution is indicated so that one or two symptoms (particularly in-
creased irritability, edginess, or agitation following antidepressant use) are not taken
as sufficient for diagnosis of a hypomanic episode, nor necessarily indicative of a bi-
polar diathesis.
Note:  Criteria A–F constitute a hypomanic episode. Hypomanic episodes are common in
bipolar I disorder but are not required for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
Major Depressive Episode
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week
period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms
is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Note:  Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to another medical condi-
tion.
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjec-
tive report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g.,
appears tearful). ( Note:  In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in al l, or almost all, activities most of the
day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than
5% of body weight in a month), or dec rease or increase in appetite nearly every
day. ( Note:  In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others; not
merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delu-
sional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (ei-
ther by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation with-
out a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another
medical condition. 
Note:  Criteria A–C constitute a major depressive episode. Major depressive episodes are
common in bipolar I disorder but are not requi red for the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder.
Note:  Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from a
natural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of intense
126 Bipolar and Related Disorders
sadness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss noted in Cri-
terion A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may be un-
derstandable or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence of a major depressive
episode in addition to the normal response to a significant loss should also be carefully
considered. This decision inevitably requires the exercise of clinical judgment based on
the individual’s history and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context
of loss.1
Bipolar I Disorder
A. Criteria have been met for at least one manic episode (Criteria A–D under “Manic Ep-
isode” above).
B. The occurrence of the manic and major depressive episode(s) is not better explained
by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional dis-
order, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorder.
Coding and Recording Procedures
The diagnostic code for bipolar I disorder is based on type of current or most recent epi-
sode and its status with respect to current severity, presence of psychotic features, and
remission status. Current severity and psychotic features are only indicated if full criteria
are currently met for a manic or major depressive episode. Remission specifiers are only
indicated if the full criteria are not current ly met for a manic, hypomanic, or major depres-
sive episode. Codes are as follows:
1In distinguishing grief from a major depressive episode (MDE), it is useful to consider that in
grief the predominant affect is feelings of emptiness and loss, while in MDE it is persistent
depressed mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or pleasure. The dysphoria in grief is
likely to decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves, the so-called pangs of
grief. These waves tend to be associated with  thoughts or reminder s of the deceased. The
depressed mood of a MDE is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations.
The pain of grief may be accompanied by positi ve emotions and humor th at are uncharacteristic
of the pervasive unhappiness and misery charac teristic of a major depressive episode. The
thought content associated with grief generally  features a preoccupation with thoughts and
memories of the deceased, rather than the self-c ritical or pessimistic ruminations seen in a MDE.
In grief, self-esteem is generally preserved, whereas in a MDE, feelings of worthlessness and self-
loathing are common. If self-derog atory ideation is present in grief, it typically involves per-
ceived failings vis-à-vis the deceased (e.g., no t visiting frequently enough, not telling the
deceased how much he or she was loved). If a be reaved individual thinks  about death and dying,
such thoughts are generally focu sed on the deceased and possibl y about “joining” the deceased,
whereas in a major depressive episode such th oughts are focused on ending one’s own life
because of feeling worthless, undeserving of life, or unable to cope with the pain of depression.Bipolar I disorderCurrent or 
most recent 
episode 
manicCurrent or 
most recent 
episode 
hypomanic* Current or 
most recent 
episode 
depressedCurrent or 
most recent 
episode 
unspecified**
Mild (p. 154) 296.41 
(F31.11)NA 296.51 
(F31.31)NA
Moderate (p. 154) 296.42 
(F31.12)NA 296.52 
(F31.32)NA
Severe (p. 154) 296.43 
(F31.13)NA 296.53 
(F31.4)NA
Bipolar I Disorder 127
In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order: bipolar
I disorder, type of current or most recent episode, severity/psychotic/remission specifiers,
followed by as many specifiers without codes as apply to the current or most recent epi-
sode.
Specify:
With anxious distress (p. 149)
With mixed features (pp. 149–150)
With rapid cycling (pp. 150–151)
With melancholic features (p. 151)
With atypical features  (pp. 151–152)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 152)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features  (p. 152)
With catatonia  (p. 152). Coding note:  Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1).
With peripartum onset  (pp. 152–153)
With seasonal pattern (pp. 153–154)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of a manic episode is a distinct period during which there is an ab-
normally, persistently elevated, expansive, or  irritable mood and persistently increased
activity or energy that is present for most of  the day, nearly every day, for a period of at
least 1 week (or any duration if hospitalizatio n is necessary), accompanied by at least three
additional symptoms from Criterion B. If the mo od is irritable rather than elevated or ex-
pansive, at least fo ur Criterion B symptoms must be present.
Mood in a manic episode is often described as euphoric, excessively cheerful, high, or
“feeling on top of the world.” In some cases, the mood is of such a highly infectious quality
that it is easily recognized as excessive and may be characterized by unlimited and hap-
hazard enthusiasm for interpersonal, sexual, or occupational inte ractions. For example,
the individual may spontaneously start extens ive conversations with strangers in public.
Often the predominant mood is irritable rather than elevated, particularly when the indi-
vidual’s wishes are denied or if the individu al has been using substances. Rapid shifts in
mood over brief periods of time may occur and are referred to as lability (i.e., the alterna-With psychotic 
features*** 
(p. 152)296.44 
(F31.2)NA 296.54 
(F31.5)NA
In partial 
remission (p. 154)296.45 
(F31.73)296.45 
(F31.71)296.55 
(F31.75)NA
In full remission 
(p. 154)296.46 
(F31.74)296.46 
(F31.72)296.56 
(F31.76)NA
Unspecified 296.40 
(F31.9)296.40 
(F31.9)296.50 
(F31.9)NA
*Severity and psychotic specifiers do not apply; code 296.40 (F31.0) for cases not in remission.
**Severity, psychotic, and remission specif iers do not apply. Code 296.7 (F31.9).
***If psychotic features are present, code the “with psychotic features” specifier irrespective of epi-
sode severity.Bipolar I disorderCurrent or 
most recent 
episode 
manicCurrent or 
most recent 
episode 
hypomanic* Current or 
most recent 
episode 
depressedCurrent or 
most recent 
episode 
unspecified**
128 Bipolar and Related Disorders
tion among euphoria, dysphoria,  and irritability). In children, happiness, silliness and
“goofiness” are normal in the context of spec ial occasions; however, if these symptoms are
recurrent, inappropriate to the context, and beyond what is expected for the developmen-
tal level of the child, they may meet Criterion A. If the happiness is unusual for a child (i.e.,
distinct from baseline), and the mood change occurs at the same ti me as symptoms that
meet Criterion B for mania, diagnostic certainty is increased; however, the mood change
must be accompanied by persistently increased activity or energy levels that are obvious
to those who know the child well.
During the manic episode, the individual may engage in multiple overlapping new
projects. The projects are often initiated with little knowledge of the topic, and nothing seems
out of the individual’s reach. The increased activity levels may manife st at unusual hours of
the day.
Inflated self-esteem is typicall y present, ranging from uncritical self-confidence to marked
grandiosity, and may reach delusi onal proportions (Criterion B1).  Despite lack of any partic-
ular experience or talent, the individual may embark on comple x tasks such as writing a novel
or seeking publicity for some im practical invention. Grandiose delusions (e.g., of having a
special relationship to a famous person) are co mmon. In children, overe stimation of abilities
and belief that, for example, they are the best at  a sport or the smartest in the class is normal;
however, when such beliefs are present despite cl ear evidence to the contrary or the child at-
tempts feats that are clearly dangerous and, most important,  represent a change from the
child’s normal behavior, the grandiosity criterion should be considered satisfied. 
One of the most common features is a decreased need for sleep (Criterion B2) and is
distinct from insomnia in which the individual wants to sleep or feels the need to sleep but
is unable. The individual may sleep little, if at all, or may awaken several hours earlier than
usual, feeling rested and full of energy. When  the sleep disturbance is severe, the individ-
ual may go for days without sleep, yet not feel  tired. Often a decreased need for sleep her-
alds the onset of a manic episode.
Speech can be rapid, pressured, loud, and diff icult to interrupt (Criterion B3). Individ-
uals may talk continuously and without regard for others’ wi shes to communicate, often
in an intrusive manner or without concern for the relevance of what is said. Speech is
sometimes characterized by jokes, puns, amus ing irrelevancies, and theatricality, with
dramatic mannerisms, singing, and excessive gesturing. Loudness and forcefulness of
speech often become more important than what  is conveyed. If the individual’s mood is
more irritable than expansive, speech may be  marked by complaints, hostile comments, or
angry tirades, particularly if attempts are ma de to interrupt the individual. Both Criterion
A and Criterion B symptoms may be accompanie d by symptoms of the opposite (i.e., de-
pressive) pole (see “with mixed features” specifier, pp. 149–150).
Often the individual’s thoughts race at a rate faster than they can be expressed through
speech (Criterion B4). Frequently there is flight  of ideas evidenced by a nearly continuous flow
of accelerated speech, with abrupt shifts from one topic to another. When flight of ideas is se-
vere, speech may become disorganized, incoherent , and particularly distressful to the individ-
ual. Sometimes thoughts are experienced as so crowded that it is very difficult to speak.
Distractibility (Criterion B5) is evidenced by  an inability to censor immaterial external
stimuli (e.g., the interviewer’s attire, backgr ound noises or conversations, furnishings in
the room) and often prevents individuals expe riencing mania from holding a rational con-
versation or attending to instructions.
The increase in goal -directed ac tivity often consists of excessive planning and partici-
pation in multiple activities, including sexual, occupational, political, or religious activi-
ties. Increased sexual drive, fantasies, and be havior are often present. Individuals in a manic
episode usually show increased sociability (e.g ., renewing old acquaintances or calling or
contacting friends or even strangers), without regard to the intrusive, domineering, and
demanding nature of these interactions. They often display psychomotor agitation or rest-
lessness (i.e., purposeless acti vity) by pacing or by holding multiple conversations simulta-
Bipolar I Disorder 129
neously. Some individuals write excessive letters , e-mails, text messages, and so forth, on
many different topics to friends,  public figures, or the media. 
The increased activity criterion can be diffic ult to ascertain in children; however, when
the child takes on many tasks simultaneously, starts devising elaborate and unrealistic
plans for projects, develops previously abse nt and developmentally inappropriate sexual
preoccupations (not accounted for by sexual abuse or exposure  to sexually explicit mate-
rial), then Criterion B might be met based on clinical judgment. It is essential to determine
whether the behavior represents a change from the child’s baseline behavior; occurs most
of the day, nearly every day for the requisite time period; and occurs in temporal associa-
tion with other symptoms of mania. 
The expansive mood, excessive optimism, gr andiosity, and poor judgment often lead
to reckless involvement in activities such as spending sprees, giving away possessions,
reckless driving, foolish business investments,  and sexual promiscuity that is unusual for
the individual, even though these activities ar e likely to have catastrophic consequences
(Criterion B7). The individual may purchase  many unneeded items without the money to
pay for them and, in some cases, give them  away. Sexual behavior may include infidelity
or indiscriminate sexual encounters with strangers, often disregarding the risk of sexually
transmitted diseases or in terpersonal consequences.
The manic episode must result in marked impairment in social or occupational func-
tioning or require hospitalizatio n to prevent harm to self or others (e.g., financial losses, il-
legal activities, loss of employment, self-injur ious behavior). By definition, the presence of
psychotic features during a manic episode also satisfies Criterion C.
Manic symptoms or syndromes that are attrib utable to the physiological effects of a
drug of abuse (e.g., in the context of cocaine or amphetamine intoxication), the side effects
of medications or treatments (e.g., steroids, L-dopa, antidepressants, stimulants), or an-
other medical condition do not count toward the diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. However,
a fully syndromal manic episode that arises duri ng treatment (e.g., with medications, elec-
troconvulsive therapy, light ther apy) or drug use and persists beyond the physiological ef-
fect of the inducing agent (i.e., after a medica tion is fully out of the individual’s system or
the effects of electroconvulsive therapy would be expected to have dissipated completely)
is sufficient evidence for a manic episode di agnosis (Criterion D). Caution is indicated so
that one or two symptoms (particularly increa sed irritability, edginess, or agitation follow-
ing antidepressant use) are not taken as suffi cient for diagnosis of a manic or hypomanic
episode, nor necessarily an indication of a bi polar disorder diathesis. It is necessary to
meet criteria for a manic episode to make a diag nosis of bipolar I disorder, but it is not re-
quired to have hypomanic or major depressi ve episodes. However, they may precede or
follow a manic episode. Full descriptions of the diagnostic features of a hypomanic epi-
sode may be found within the text for bipola r II disorder, and the features of a major de-
pressive episode are described within th e text for major depressive disorder.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
During a manic episode, individuals often do not perceive that they are ill or in need of treat-
ment and vehemently resist efforts to be treated. Individuals may change their dress, makeup,
or personal appearance to a more sexually su ggestive or flamboyant style. Some perceive a
sharper sense of smell, hearing, or vision. Gambling and antisocial behaviors may accompany
the manic episode. Some individuals may become  hostile and physically threatening to others
and, when delusional, may become physically  assaultive or suicidal. Catastrophic conse-
quences of a manic episode (e.g.,  involuntary hospitalization, difficulties with the law, serious
financial difficulties) often result from poor judgment, loss of insight, and hyperactivity. 
Mood may shift very rapidly to anger or depression. Depressive  symptoms may occur
during a manic episode and, if present, may last moments, hour s, or, more rarely, days (see
“with mixed features” specifier, pp. 149–150).
130 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence estimate in the contin ental United States was 0.6% for bipolar I
disorder as defined in DSM-IV. Twelve-month prevalence of bipolar I disorder across 11
countries ranged from 0.0% to 0.6%. The life time male-to-female prevalence ratio is ap-
proximately 1.1:1. 
Development and Course
Mean age at onset of the first manic, hypomanic, or major depressive episode is approxi-
mately 18 years for bipola r I disorder. Special considerations are necessary to detect the di-
agnosis in children. Since children of the same chronological age may be at different
developmental stages, it is difficult to defi ne with precision what is “normal” or “ex-
pected” at any given point. Therefore, each ch ild should be judged according to his or her
own baseline. Onset occurs throughout the life  cycle, including firs t onsets in the 60s or
70s. Onset of manic symptoms (e.g., sexual or so cial disinhibition) in late mid-life or late-
life should prompt consideratio n of medical conditions (e.g., frontotemporal neurocogni-
tive disorder) and of substance ingestion or withdrawal. 
More than 90% of individuals who have a sin gle manic episode go on to have recurrent
mood episodes. Approximately 60% of manic episodes occur immediately before a major
depressive episode. Individuals with bipolar I disorder who have multiple (four or more)
mood episodes (major depressi ve, manic, or hypomanic) within 1 year receive the speci-
fier “with rapid cycling.” 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Bipolar disorder is mo re common in high-income than in low-income
countries (1.4 vs. 0.7%). Separated, divorced,  or widowed individuals have higher rates of
bipolar I disorder than do individuals who ar e married or have neve r been married, but
the direction of the association is unclear. 
Genetic and physiological. A family history of bipolar diso rder is one of the strongest and
most consistent risk factors for bipolar disord ers. There is an average 10-fold increased risk
among adult relatives of individuals with bipo lar I and bipolar II disorders. Magnitude of
risk increases with degree of kinship. Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder likely share a ge-
netic origin, reflected in familial co-aggregat ion of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. 
Course modifiers. After an individual has a manic episode with psychotic features, subse-
quent manic episodes are more likely to in clude psychotic featur es. Incomplete inter-
episode recovery is more common when th e current episode is accompanied by mood-
incongruent psychotic features.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Little information exists on specific cultural differences in the expression of bipolar I dis-
order. One possible explanation for this ma y be that diagnostic instruments are often
translated and applied in diff erent cultures with no transcultural validation. In one U.S.
study, 12-month prevalence of bipolar I diso rder was significantly lower for Afro-Carib-
beans than for African Americans or whites. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Females are more likely to experience rapid cycling and mixed states, and to have patterns of
comorbidity that differ from th ose of males, including higher rates of lifetime eating disor-
ders. Females with bipolar I or II disorder are more likely to experience depressive symptoms
than males. They also have a higher lifetime risk of alcohol use disorder than are males and a
much greater likelihood of alcohol use disorder  than do females in the general population.
Bipolar I Disorder 131
Suicide Risk
The lifetime risk of suicide in individuals with  bipolar disorder is estimated to be at least
15 times that of the general population. In fa ct, bipolar disorder may account for one-quar-
ter of all completed su icides. A past history of suicide attempt and percent days spent de-
pressed in the past year are associated with gr eater risk of suicide attempts or completions.
Functional Consequences of Bipolar I Disorder
Although many individuals with bipolar disord er return to a fully functional level be-
tween episodes, approximately 30%  show severe impairment in  work role function. Func-
tional recovery lags substantially behind reco very from symptoms, especially with respect
to occupational recovery, resulting in lower socioeconomic status despite equivalent lev-
els of education when compared with the ge neral population. Individuals with bipolar I
disorder perform more poorly than healthy in dividuals on cognitive tests. Cognitive im-
pairments may contribute to vocational and interpersonal difficulties and persist through
the lifespan, even during euthymic periods.
Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive disorder. Major depressive disorder may also be accompanied by hy-
pomanic or manic symptoms (i.e., fewer symptoms or for a shorter duration than required
for mania or hypomania). When the individual presents in an episode of major depression,
one must depend on corroborating history re garding past episodes of mania or hypoma-
nia. Symptoms of irritability may be associated with either major depressive disorder or
bipolar disorder, adding to  diagnostic complexity.
Other bipolar disorders. Diagnosis of bipolar I disorder is differentiated from bipolar II
disorder by determining whether there have be en any past episodes of mania. Other spec-
ified and unspecified bipolar and related disord ers should be differentiated from bipolar I
and II disorders by considering whether eith er the episodes invol ving manic or hypo-
manic symptoms or the episodes of depressive symptoms fail  to meet the full criteria for
those conditions.
Bipolar disorder due to another medical co ndition may be distinguished from bipolar
I and II disorders by identifying, based on best  clinical evidence, a causally related medical
condition.
Generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder , posttraumatic stress disorder, or other
anxiety disorders. These disorders need to be consider ed in the differential diagnosis as
either the primary disorder or, in some case s, a comorbid disorder. A careful history of
symptoms is needed to  differentiate generalized anxiety disorder from bipolar disorder,
as anxious ruminations may be mistaken for ra cing thoughts, and efforts to minimize anx-
ious feelings may be taken as impulsive beha vior. Similarly, sympto ms of posttraumatic
stress disorder need to be differentiated from bipolar disorder. It is helpful to assess the ep-
isodic nature of the symptoms described, as well as to consider symptom triggers, in mak-
ing this differential diagnosis.
Substance/medication-induced bipolar disorder. Substance use disorders may mani-
fest with substance.medicati on-induced manic symptoms th at must be distinguished
from bipolar I disorder; response to mood stabilizers during a substance/medication-
induced mania may not necessarily be diagnost ic for bipolar disorder. There may be sub-
stantial overlap in view of the tendency for individuals with bipolar I disorder to overuse
substances during an episode. A primary diagnosis of bipolar disorder must be estab-
lished based on symptoms that remain once  substances are no longer being used.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. This disorder may be misdiagnosed as bipolar
disorder, especially in adolescents and children. Many symptoms overlap with the symp-
132 Bipolar and Related Disorders
toms of mania, such as rapid speech, racing thoughts, distra ctibility, and less need for
sleep. The “double counting” of symptoms toward both ADHD and bipolar disorder can
be avoided if the clinician clarifies whether the symptom(s) represents a distinct episode. 
Personality disorders. Personality disorders such as borderline personality disorder
may have substantial symptomatic overlap wi th bipolar disorders, since mood lability
and impulsivity are common in both conditions . Symptoms must represent a distinct ep-
isode, and the noticeable increase over baseline required for the diagnosis of bipolar dis-
order must be present. A diagnosis of a personality disorder should not be made during an
untreated mood episode.
Disorders with prominent irritability. In individuals with severe irritability, particularly
children and adolescents, care must be take n to apply the diagnosis of bipolar disorder
only to those who have had a clear episode of  mania or hypomania—tha t is, a distinct time
period, of the required  duration, during which the irritability was clearly different from
the individual’s baseline and was accompan ied by the onset of Criterion B symptoms.
When a child’s irritability is persistent and pa rticularly severe, the diagnosis of disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder wo uld be more appropriate. Indeed, when any child is being
assessed for mania, it is essential that th e symptoms represent a clear change from the
child’s typical behavior.
Comorbidity
Co-occurring mental disorders are common, wi th the most frequent disorders being any
anxiety disorder (e.g., pa nic attacks, social anxiety disorder [social phobia], specific pho-
bia), occurring in approximatel y three-fourths of individuals; ADHD, any disruptive, im-
pulse-control, or conduct disorder (e.g., intermittent explosive disorder, oppositional
defiant disorder, conduct disorder), and any su bstance use disorder (e.g., alcohol use dis-
order) occur in over half of individuals with bipolar I disorder. Adults with bipolar I dis-
order have high rates of serious and/or untreated co-occurring medical conditions.
Metabolic syndrome and migraine are more common among individuals with bipolar dis-
order than in the general population. More than half of individuals whose symptoms meet
criteria for bipolar disorder have an alcoho l use disorder, and those with both disorders
are at greater risk for suicide attempt.
Bipolar II Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 296.89 (F31.81)
For a diagnosis of bipolar II disorder, it is necessary to meet the following criteria for a cur-
rent or past hypomanic episode and the following criteria for a current or past major de-
pressive episode:
Hypomanic Episode
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
and abnormally and persistently increased activity or energy, lasting at least 4 consec-
utive days and present most of the day, nearly every day.
B. During the period of mood disturbance and in creased energy and activity, three (or more)
of the following symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only irritable), represent a no-
ticeable change from usual behavior, and have been present to a significant degree:
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
Bipolar II Disorder 133
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant external
stimuli), as reported or observed.
6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or
psychomotor agitation.
7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful conse-
quences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buyin g sprees, sexual indiscretions, or
foolish business investments).
C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning that is uncharac-
teristic of the individual when not symptomatic. 
D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable by others.
E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or occupa-
tional functioning or to necessitate hospitalization. If there are psychotic features, the
episode is, by definition, manic.
F. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
of abuse, a medication or other treatment).
Note:  A full hypomanic episode that emerges during antidepressant treatment (e.g.,
medication, electroconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully syndromal level beyond
the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for a hypomanic episode
diagnosis. However, caution is indicated so that one or two symptoms (particularly in-
creased irritability, edginess, or agitation following antidepressant use) are not taken
as sufficient for diagnosis of a hypomanic episode, nor necessarily indicative of a bi-
polar diathesis.
Major Depressive Episode
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week
period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms
is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Note:  Do not include symptoms that are clearly attributable to a medical condition.
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjec-
tive report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g.,
appears tearful). ( Note:  In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in al l, or almost all, activities most of the
day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than
5% of body weight in a month), or dec rease or increase in appetite nearly every
day. ( Note:  In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others; not
merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delu-
sional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (ei-
ther by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation with-
out a specific plan, a suicide attempt, or a specific plan for committing suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning. 
C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another
medical condition.
134 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Note:  Criteria A–C above constitute a major depressive episode.
Note:  Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from a nat-
ural disaster, a serious medical illness or disability) may include the feelings of intense sad-
ness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss noted in Criterion
A, which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may be under-
standable or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence of a major depressive episode
in addition to the normal response to a significant loss should be carefully considered. This
decision inevitably requires the ex ercise of clinical judgment ba sed on the individual’s history
and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context of loss.1 
Bipolar II Disorder
A. Criteria have been met for at least one hypomanic episode (Criteria A–F under “Hypo-
manic Episode” above) and at least one major depressive episode (Criteria A–C under
“Major Depressive Episode” above).
B. There has never been a manic episode.
C. The occurrence of the hypomanic episode( s) and major depressive episode(s) is not
better explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disor-
der, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and
other psychotic disorder.
D. The symptoms of depression or the unpredictability caused by frequent alternation be-
tween periods of depression and hypomania caus es clinically significant distress or im-
pairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding and Recording Procedures
Bipolar II disorder has one diagnostic code: 296.89 (F31.81). Its status with respect to cur-
rent severity, presence of psychotic features, course, and other specifiers cannot be
coded but should be indicated in writing (e.g., 296.89 [F31.81] bipolar II disorder, current
episode depressed, moderate severity, with mi xed features; 296.89 [F31.81] bipolar II dis-
order, most recent episode depressed, in partial remission).
Specify current or most recent episode: 
Hypomanic  
Depressed
Specify if:
With anxious distress (p. 149)
With mixed features (pp. 149–150)
1In distinguishing grief from a major  depressive episode (MDE), it is useful to consider that in grief
the predominant affect is feelings of emptiness an d loss, while in a MDE it is persistent depressed
mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or  pleasure. The dysphoria in grief is likely to
decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves, the so-called pangs of grief. These
waves tend to be associated with thoughts or re minders of the deceased. The depressed mood of a
MDE is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations. The pain of grief may
be accompanied by positive emotions and humor th at are uncharacteristic of the pervasive unhap-
piness and misery characteristic of a MDE. The thought content associated with grief generally fea-
tures a preoccupation with thoughts and memories of the deceased, rather than the self-critical or
pessimistic ruminations seen in a MDE. In grief, self-esteem is generally preserved, whereas in a
MDE feelings of worthlessness and self-loathing ar e common. If self-derogatory ideation is present
in grief, it typically involves pe rceived failings vis-à-vis the deceased (e.g., not visiting frequently
enough, not telling the deceased how much he or she was loved). If a bereaved individual thinks
about death and dying, such thoughts are genera lly focused on the deceased and possibly about
“'joining” the deceased, whereas in a MDE such thoughts are focused on ending one’s own life
because of feeling worthless, undeserving of life, or unable to cope with the pain of depression.
Bipolar II Disorder 135
With rapid cycling (pp. 150–151)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 152)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features  (p. 152)
With catatonia  (p. 152). Coding note:  Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1).
With peripartum onset  (pp. 152–153)
With seasonal pattern  (pp. 153–154): Applies only to the pattern of major depressive
episodes.
Specify course if full criteria for a mood episode are not currently met:
In partial remission  (p. 154)
In full remission  (p. 154)
Specify severity if full criteria for a mood episode are currently met:
Mild (p. 154)
Moderate  (p. 154)
Severe (p. 154)
Diagnostic Features
Bipolar II disorder is characterized by a clin ical course of recurr ing mood episodes con-
sisting of one or more majo r depressive episodes (Criteria A–C under “Major Depressive
Episode”) and at least one hypomanic epis ode (Criteria A–F under “Hypomanic Epi-
sode”). The major depressive episode must last at least 2 weeks, and the hypomanic epi-
sode must last at least 4 days, to meet the di agnostic criteria. During the mood episode(s),
the requisite number of symptoms  must be present most of th e day, nearly every day, and
represent a noticeable change from usual behavior and functioning. The presence of a
manic episode during the course of illness pr ecludes the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder
(Criterion B under “Bipolar II Disorder”). Episodes of substance/medication-induced de-
pressive disorder or substance/medication-i nduced bipolar and related disorder (repre-
senting the physiological effects of a medicati on, other somatic treatments for depression,
drugs of abuse, or toxin exposure) or of de pressive and related disorder due to another
medical condition or bipolar and related disord er due to another medi cal condition do not
count toward a diagnosis of bi polar II disorder unless they persist beyond the physiolog-
ical effects of the treatment or substance and then meet duration criteria for an episode. In
addition, the episodes must not be better acco unted for by schizoaffective disorder and are
not superimposed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or
other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum or other psychotic disorders (Cri-
terion C under “Bipolar II Disorder”). The de pressive episodes or hypomanic fluctuations
must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning (Criterion D under “Bipolar II Disorder ”); however, for hy-
pomanic episodes, this requirement does not have to be met. A hypomanic episode that
causes significant impairment would likely qu alify for the diagnosis of manic episode and,
therefore, for a lifetime diagnosis of bipolar I disorder. The recurrent major depressive ep-
isodes are often more frequent and lengthier than those occurring in bipolar I disorder.
Individuals with bipolar II d isorder typically present to a clinician during a major de-
pressive episode and are unlikely to complain  initially of hypomania. Typically, the hy-
pomanic episodes themselves do not cause im pairment. Instead, th e impairment results
from the major depressive episodes or from a persistent pattern of unpredictable mood
changes and fluctuating, unreliable interperso nal or occupational functioning. Individu-
als with bipolar II disorder may not view the hypomanic episodes as pathological or dis-
advantageous, although others may be troubled by the indi vidual’s erratic behavior.
Clinical information from other informants, such as close friends or relatives, is often use-
ful in establishing the diagnosis of bipolar II disorder. 
136 Bipolar and Related Disorders
A hypomanic episode should not be confused wi th the several days of euthymia and re-
stored energy or activity that may follow remiss ion of a major depressive  episode. Despite the
substantial differences in duration and severi ty between a manic and hypomanic episode, bi-
polar II disorder is not a “milder form” of bipo lar I disorder. Compared with individuals with
bipolar I disorder, individuals with bipolar II di sorder have greater chronicity of illness and
spend, on average, more time in the depressive phase of their illness, which can be severe and/
or disabling. Depressive symptoms co-occurr ing with a hypomanic episode or hypomanic
symptoms co-occurring with a depressive episod e are common in individuals with bipolar II
disorder and are overrepresented in females, pa rticularly hypomania with mixed features. In-
dividuals experiencing hypomania with mixed fe atures may not label their symptoms as hy-
pomania, but instead experience them as depr ession with increased energy or irritability.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A common feature of bipolar II disorder is impulsivity, which can contribute to suicide at-
tempts and substance use disorders. Impulsivit y may also stem from a concurrent person-
ality disorder, substance use disorder, anxiet y disorder, another mental disorder, or a
medical condition. There may be heightened levels of creativity in some individuals with
a bipolar disorder. However, that relationship  may be nonlinear; th at is, greater lifetime
creative accomplishments have been associated  with milder forms of  bipolar disorder, and
higher creativity has been f ound in unaffected family members. The individual’s attach-
ment to heightened creativity during hypomanic episodes may contribute to ambivalence
about seeking treatment or undermine adherence to treatment. 
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of bipolar II disord er, internationally, is  0.3%. In the United
States, 12-month prevalence is 0.8%. The prevalence rate of pediatric bipolar II disorder is
difficult to establish. DSM-IV bipolar I, bipola r II, and bipolar disorder not otherwise spec-
ified yield a combined prevalence rate of 1. 8% in U.S. and non-U.S. community samples,
with higher rates (2.7% inclusive) in youths age 12 years or older. 
Development and Course
Although bipolar II disorder can begin in late adolescence and throughout adulthood, av-
erage age at onset is the mid-20s, which is slight ly later than for bipolar I disorder but ear-
lier than for major depressive  disorder. The illness most of ten begins with a depressive
episode and is not recognized as bipolar II d isorder until a hypomanic episode occurs; this
happens in about 12% of individuals with the initial diagnosis of major depressive disor-
der. Anxiety, substance use, or eating diso rders may also precede the diagnosis, compli-
cating its detection. Many individuals expe rience several episodes of major depression
prior to the first recognized hypomanic episode. 
The number of lifetime episodes (both hypomanic and major depressive episodes)
tends to be higher for bipolar II disorder than for major depressive disorder or bipolar I
disorder. However, individuals with bipolar I disorder are actually more likely to experi-
ence hypomanic symptoms than  are individuals with bipolar II disorder.The interval
between mood episodes in the co urse of bipolar II disorder tends to decrease as the indi-
vidual ages. While the hypomanic episode is the feature that defines bipolar II disorder,
depressive episodes are more enduring and disabling over time. Despite the predomi-
nance of depression, once a hypomanic epis ode has occurred, the diagnosis becomes bi-
polar II disorder and never reve rts to major depressive disorder.
Approximately 5%–15% of individuals with bipolar II disorder ha ve multiple (four or
more) mood episodes (hypomanic or major depressive) within the previous 12 months. If
Bipolar II Disorder 137
this pattern is present, it is noted by the specifier “with rapid cycling.” By definition, psy-
chotic symptoms do not occur in hypomanic episodes, and they appear to be less frequent
in the major depressive episodes in bipolar II di sorder than in those of bipolar I disorder. 
Switching from a depressive episode to a manic or hypomanic episode (with or with-
out mixed features) may occur, both spontane ously and during treatment for depression.
About 5%–15% of individuals with bipolar II disorder will ultimately develop a manic ep-
isode, which changes the diagnosis to bipolar I disorder, regardless of  subsequent course. 
Making the diagnosis in children is often a challenge, especially in those with irritabil-
ity and hyperarousal that is nonepisodic  (i.e., lacks the well-demarcated periods of altered
mood). Nonepisodic irritability in  youth is associated with an elevated risk for anxiety dis-
orders and major depressive disorder, but not bipolar disorder, in ad ulthood. Persistently
irritable youths have lower familial rates of bipolar disorder than do  youths who have bi-
polar disorder. For a hypomanic episode to be  diagnosed, the child’s symptoms must ex-
ceed what is expected in a given environment and culture for the child’s developmental
stage. Compared with adult onset of bipolar II disorder, childhood or  adolescent onset of
the disorder may be associated with a more severe lifetime course. The 3-year incidence
rate of first-onset bipolar II disorder in adults older than 60 years is 0.34%. However, dis-
tinguishing individuals older than 60 years with bipolar II disorder by late versus early
age at onset does not appear to have any clinical utility.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. The risk of bipolar II disorder  tends to be highest among rel-
atives of individuals with bipolar II disorder, as opposed to individuals with bipolar I dis-
order or major depressive disorder. There ma y be genetic factors influencing the age at
onset for bipolar disorders.
Course modifiers. A rapid-cycling pattern is associated  with a poorer prognosis. Return
to previous level of social fu nction for individuals with bipolar II disorder is more likely
for individuals of younger age and with less severe depression, sugge sting adverse effects
of prolonged illness on recovery. More education, fewer ye ars of illness, and being mar-
ried are independently associated with functi onal recovery in individuals with bipolar
disorder, even after diagnostic  type (I vs. II), current depressive symptoms, and presence
of psychiatric comorbidity are taken into account.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Whereas the gender ratio for bipolar I disorder is equal, findings on gender differences in
bipolar II disorder are mixed, differing by type of sample (i.e., registry, community, or
clinical) and country of origin. There is little to  no evidence of bipolar gender differences,
whereas some, but not all, clinical samples su ggest that bipolar II disorder is more com-
mon in females than in males, which may refl ect gender differences in treatment seeking
or other factors. 
Patterns of illness and comorbidity, however,  seem to differ by gender, with females
being more likely than males to report hypomania with mixed depressive features and a
rapid-cycling course. Childbirth may be a spec ific trigger for a hypomanic episode, which
can occur in 10%–20% of females in nonclinical populations and most typically in the early
postpartum period. Distinguishing hypomani a from the elated mood and reduced sleep
that normally accompany the birth of a chil d may be challenging. Postpartum hypomania
may foreshadow the onset of a depression that occurs in abou t half of females who expe-
rience postpartum “highs.” Accurate detectio n of bipolar II disorder may help in estab-
lishing appropriate treatment of the depression , which may reduce the risk of suicide and
infanticide. 
138 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Suicide Risk
Suicide risk is high in bipolar II disorder. Approximately one-third of individuals with bi-
polar II disorder report a lifetime history of suicide attempt. The prev alence rates of life-
time attempted suicide in bipolar II and bipola r I disorder appear to be similar (32.4% and
36.3%, respectively). However, the lethality of attempts, as defined by a lower ratio of at-
tempts to completed suicides, may be higher in individuals with bipolar II disorder com-
pared with individuals with bipolar I disorder. There may be an association between
genetic markers and increased risk for suicidal behavior in individuals with bipolar dis-
order, including a 6.5-fold higher risk of su icide among first-degree relatives of bipolar II
probands compared with those with bipolar I disorder. 
Functional Consequences  of Bipolar II Disorder
Although many in dividuals with bipolar II disorder return to a fully functional level be-
tween mood episodes, at least 15% continue to have some in ter-episode dysfunction, and
20% transition directly into another mood episode without inter-ep isode recovery. Func-
tional recovery lags substantially behind recovery from symptoms of bipolar II disorder,
especially in regard to occupational recovery , resulting in lower socioeconomic status de-
spite equivalent levels of education with the general population. Individuals with bipolar
II disorder perform more  poorly than healthy individuals on cognitive tests and, with the
exception of memory and semantic fluency, ha ve similar cognitive impairment as do in-
dividuals with bipolar I disord er. Cognitive impairments associ ated with bipolar II disor-
der may contribute to vocational difficulti es. Prolonged unemployment in individuals
with bipolar disorder is associated with more episodes of depression, older age, increased
rates of current panic disorder, and lif etime history of alcohol use disorder.
Differential Diagnosis 
Major depressive disorder. Perhaps the most challenging differential diagnosis to con-
sider is major depressive di sorder, which may be accompanied by hypomanic or manic
symptoms that do not meet full criteria (i.e., either fewer symptoms or a shorter duration
than required for a hypomanic episode). This is  especially true in evaluating individuals
with symptoms of irritability, which may be associated with either  major depressive dis-
order or bipolar II disorder. 
Cyclothymic disorder. In cyclothymic disorder, there are numerous periods of hypo-
manic symptoms and numerous periods of depr essive symptoms that do not meet symp-
tom or duration criteria for a major depressive  episode. Bipolar II disorder is distinguished
from cyclothymic disorder by the presence of  one or more major depressive episodes. If a
major depressive episode occurs after the firs t 2 years of cyclothymic disorder, the addi-
tional diagnosis of bipolar II disorder is given.
Schizophrenia spectrum and other related psychotic disorders. Bipolar II disorder must
be distinguished from psychotic disorders (e .g., schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia,
and delusional disorder). Sc hizophrenia, schizoaffective di sorder, and delusional disor-
der are all characterized by periods of psychotic symptoms that occur in the absence of
prominent mood symptoms. Other helpful considerations incl ude the accompanying
symptoms, previous cour se, and family history.
Panic disorder or other anxiety disorders. Anxiety disorders need to be considered in
the differential diagnosis and may frequent ly be present as co-occurring disorders.
Substance use disorders. Substance use disorders are included in the differential diag-
nosis. 
Attention-deficit/hype ractivity disorder. Attention-deficit/hypera ctivity disorder (ADHD)
may be misdiagnosed as bipolar II disorder, especially in adolescents and children. Many
Cyclothymic Disorder 139
symptoms of ADHD, such as rapid speech, racing thoughts, distractibility, and less need
for sleep, overlap with the symp toms of hypomania. The double  counting of symptoms to-
ward both ADHD and bipolar II disorder can be avoided if the clinician clarifies whether
the symptoms represent a distin ct episode and if the noticeab le increase over baseline re-
quired for the diagnosis of bipo lar II disorder is present. 
Personality disorders. The same convention as applies for ADHD also applies when
evaluating an individual for a personality disorder such as borderline personality disor-
der, since mood lability and impulsivity are common in both personality disorders and bi-
polar II disorder. Symptoms must represent a di stinct episode, and the noticeable increase
over baseline required for the diagnosis of bipo lar II disorder must be present. A diagnosis
of a personality disorder should not be made during an untreated mood episode unless
the lifetime history supports the pr esence of a personality disorder.
Other bipolar disorders. Diagnosis of bipolar II disorder should be differentiated from
bipolar I disorder by carefully considering whether there have been any past episodes of
mania and from other specified and unspecifie d bipolar and related disorders by confirm-
ing the presence of fully synd romal hypomania and depression.
Comorbidity
Bipolar II disorder is more often than not associated with one or more co-occurring mental
disorders, with anxiety disorders being the most common. Approximately 60% of individ-
uals with bipolar II disorder  have three or more co-occurr ing mental disorders; 75% have
an anxiety disorder; and 37% have a substa nce use disorder. Children and adolescents
with bipolar II disorder have a higher rate  of co-occurring anxiety disorders compared
with those with bipolar I diso rder, and the anxiety disorder most often predates the bi-
polar disorder. Anxiety and substance use diso rders occur in individuals with bipolar II
disorder at a higher rate than in the genera l population. Approximately 14% of individuals
with bipolar II disorder have at least one lif etime eating disorder, with binge-eating dis-
order being more common than bulim ia nervosa and anorexia nervosa.
These commonly co-occurring disorders do no t seem to follow a course of illness that
is truly independent from that of the bipolar disorder, but rather have strong associations
with mood states. For example, anxiety and ea ting disorders tend to associate most with
depressive symptoms, and substance use disord ers are moderately associated with manic
symptoms. 
Cyclothymic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.13 (F34.0)
A. For at least 2 years (at least 1 year in children and adolescents) there have been nu-
merous periods with hypomanic symptoms that do not meet criteria for a hypomanic
episode and numerous periods with depressive sym ptoms that do not meet criteria for
a major depressive episode.
B. During the above 2-year period (1 year in children and adolescents), the hypomanic
and depressive periods have been present for at least half the time and the individual
has not been without the symptoms for more than 2 months at a time.
C. Criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode have never been met. 
D. The symptoms in Criterion A are not better explained by schizoaffective disorder,
schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or other specified or un-
specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
E. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism).
140 Bipolar and Related Disorders
F. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With anxious distress (see p. 149)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of cyclot hymic disorder is a chronic, fluctuating mood disturbance
involving numerous periods of hypomanic symptoms and periods of depressive symp-
toms that are distinct from each other (Criterion A). The hypomanic symptoms are of
insufficient number, severity, pervasiveness, or  duration to meet full criteria for a hypo-
manic episode, and the depressive symptoms ar e of insufficient nu mber, severity, perva-
siveness, or duration to meet full criteria for a major depressive episode. During the initial
2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents), the symptoms must be persistent (pres-
ent more days than not), and any symptom-fr ee intervals last no longer than 2 months
(Criterion B). The diagnosis of cyclothymic disorder is made only if the criteria for a major
depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode  have never been met (Criterion C).
If an individual with cyclothymic disorder su bsequently (i.e., after the initial 2 years in
adults or 1 year in children or adolescents) experiences a major depressive, manic, or hy-
pomanic episode, the diagnosis changes to majo r depressive disorder , bipolar I disorder,
or other specified or unspecified bipolar and related disorder (subclassified as hypomanic
episode without prior major depressive episod e), respectively, and the cyclothymic disor-
der diagnosis is dropped.
The cyclothymic disorder diagnosis is not made  if the pattern of mood swings is better
explained by schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delu-
sional disorder, or other specified and un specified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorders (Criterion D), in which c ase the mood symptoms are considered asso-
ciated features of the psychoti c disorder. The mood disturbanc e must also not be attribut-
able to the physiological effe cts of a substance (e.g., a dr ug of abuse, a medication) or
another medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidis m) (Criterion E). Although some individ-
uals may function particularly  well during some of the pe riods of hypomania, over the
prolonged course of the disorder , there must be clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other import ant areas of functioning as a result of the
mood disturbance (Criterion F). The impairment may develop as a result of prolonged pe-
riods of cyclical, often unpredictable mood ch anges (e.g., the individual may be regarded
as temperamental, moody, unpredicta ble, inconsistent , or unreliable).
Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of cyclothymic diso rder is approximately 0.4%–1%. Prevalence in
mood disorders clinics may rang e from 3% to 5%. In the general population, cyclothymic
disorder is apparently equally common in males and females. In clinical settings, females
with cyclothymic disorder may be more lik ely to present for tr eatment than males.
Development and Course
Cyclothymic disorder usually begins in adolescence or early adult life and is sometimes
considered to reflect a temperamental predispo sition to other disorders in this chapter.
Cyclothymic disorder usually has an insidious onset and a persistent course. There is a
15%–50% risk that an individual with cyclothy mic disorder will subsequently develop bi-
polar I disorder or bipolar II disorder. Onset of persistent, fluctuating hypomanic and de-
pressive symptoms late in adult life needs to  be clearly differentiated from bipolar and
Cyclothymic Disorder 141
related disorder due to another medical condition and depressi ve disorder due to another
medical condition (e.g., multiple  sclerosis) before the cyclothymic disorder diagnosis is as-
signed. Among children with cyclothymic diso rder, the mean age at onset of symptoms is
6.5 years of age.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Major depressive disorder, bipolar I disorder, and bipolar II
disorder are more common among first-degree bi ological relatives of individuals with cyclo-
thymic disorder than in the general population. There may also be an increased familial risk of
substance-related disorders. Cyclothymic disord er may be more common in the first-degree
biological relatives of individuals with bipolar I disorder than in the general population. 
Differential Diagnosis
Bipolar and related disorder due to anothe r medical condition and depressive disorder
due to another medical condition. The diagnosis of bipolar and related disorder due to
another medical condition or depressive disorder due to another medical condition is
made when the mood disturbance is judged to be attributable to the physiological effect of
a specific, usually chronic medical condition (e.g., hyperthyroidism). This determination
is based on the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings. If it is judged that the
hypomanic and depressive symptoms are not the physiological consequence of the med-
ical condition, then the primary mental disorder (i.e., cyclothymi c disorder) and the med-
ical condition are coded. For example, this would be the case if the mood symptoms are
considered to be the psychological (not the physiological) consequence of having a chronic
medical condition, or if there is no etiological relationship between the hypomanic and de-
pressive symptoms and the medical condition.
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder and substance/medica-
tion-induced depressive disorder. Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related
disorder and substance/medica tion-induced depressive diso rder are distinguished from
cyclothymic disorder by the judgment that  a substance/medication (especially stimu-
lants) is etiologically related to  the mood disturbance. The fr equent mood swings in these
disorders that are suggestive of cyclothymic disorder usually resolv e following cessation
of substance/medication use.
Bipolar I disorder, with rapid cycling, an d bipolar II disorder, with rapid cycling.
Both disorders may resemble cyclothymic disorder by virtue of the frequent marked shifts
in mood. By definition, in cyclothymic disord er the criteria for a major depressive, manic,
or hypomanic episode has never been met, wh ereas the bipolar I di sorder and bipolar II
disorder specifier “with rapid cycling” requ ires that full mood ep isodes be present. 
Borderline person ality disorder. Borderline personality diso rder is associated with
marked shifts in mood that may suggest cyclothymic disorder. If the criteria are met for
both disorders, both borderline personality disorder and cyclothymic disorder may be di-
agnosed.
Comorbidity
Substance-related disorders and sleep disorder s (i.e., difficulties in initiating and main-
taining sleep) may be present in individuals with cyclothy mic disorder. Most children
with cyclothymic disorder treated in outpati ent psychiatric settings have comorbid mental
conditions; they are more likely than other pediatric patients with  mental disorders to
have comorbid attention-defi cit/hyperactivity disorder.
142 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Substance/Medication-Induced
 Bipolar and Related Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical picture
and is characterized by elevated, expansive, or irritable mood, with or without depressed
mood, or markedly diminished interest or plea sure in all, or almost all, activities.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both
(1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication
or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Crite-
rion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a bipolar or related disorder that is not sub-
stance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent bipolar or related disor-
der could include the following:
The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms per-
sist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of acute
withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence suggesting the existence
of an independent non-substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder
(e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes). 
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium. 
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes fo r the [specific substance/medication]-
induced bipolar and related disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-
CM code depends on whether or not there is a co morbid substance use disorder present for
the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-
induced bipolar and related disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should
record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced bipolar and related dis-
order (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with coca ine-induced bipolar and related disorder”). If a
moderate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced bipolar
and related disorder, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moder-
ate [substance] use disorder” or “severe [subs tance] use disorder,” depending on the severity
of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g.,
after a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the
clinician should record only the substance-induced bipolar and related disorder.
ICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CMWith use 
disorder, 
mildWith use 
disorder, 
moderate 
or severeWithout 
use 
disorder
Alcohol 291.89 F10.14 F10.24 F10.94
Phencyclidine 292.84 F16.14 F16.24 F16.94
Other hallucinogen 292.84 F16.14 F16.24 F16.94
Substance/Medication-Induced Bipolar and Related Disorder 143
Specify if (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for di-
agnoses associated with substance class):
With onset during intoxication:  If the criteria are met for intoxication with the sub-
stance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal:  If criteria are met for withdrawal from the substance
and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
Recording Procedures
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication -induced bipolar and related disor-
der begins with the specific su bstance (e.g., cocaine, dexame thasone) that is presumed to
be causing the bipolar mood symptoms. The diag nostic code is selected from the table in-
cluded in the criteria set, which is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit
into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethason e), the code for “other substance” should be
used; and in cases in which a substance is judged  to be an etiological factor but the specific
class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
The name of the disorder is followed by the sp ecification of onset (i.e., onset during in-
toxication, onset during with drawal). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM,
which combine the substance-induced disorder and substance use disorder into a single
code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code  is given for the substance use disorder. For
example, in the case of irritable symptoms oc curring during intoxica tion in a man with a
severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is 292.84 cocaine-induced bipolar and related
disorder, with onset during intoxication. An additional diagnosis of 304.20 severe cocaine
use disorder is also given. When more than one substance is judged to play a significant
role in the development of bipolar mood symp toms, each should be listed separately (e.g.,
292.84 methylphenidate-induced bipolar and re lated disorder, with onset during intoxi-
cation; 292.84 dexamethasone-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during in-
toxication).
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/medication -induced bipolar and related disor-
der begins with the specific su bstance (e.g., cocaine, dexame thasone) that is presumed to
be causing the bipolar mood symptoms. The diag nostic code is selected from the table in-
cluded in the criteria set, whic h is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a co-
morbid substance use disorder. For substances th at do not fit into any of the classes (e.g.,
dexamethasone), the code for “other substanc e” should be used; and in cases in which a
substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is un-
known, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
When recording the name of the disorder, th e comorbid substance use disorder (if any)
is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-inducedSedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic 292.84 F13.14 F13.24 F13.94
Amphetamine (or other 
stimulant)292.84 F15.14 F15.24 F15.94
Cocaine 292.84 F14.14 F14.24 F14.94
Other (or unknown) substance 292.84 F19.14 F19.24 F19.94ICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CMWith use 
disorder, 
mildWith use 
disorder, 
moderate 
or severeWithout 
use 
disorder
144 Bipolar and Related Disorders
bipolar and related disorder, foll owed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during in-
toxication, onset during withdrawal). For exam ple, in the case of irritable symptoms oc-
curring during intoxica tion in a man with a severe coca ine use disorder, the diagnosis is
F14.24 severe cocaine use disorder with co caine-induced bipolar and related disorder,
with onset during intoxication . A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use
disorder is not given. If the substance-induce d bipolar and related disorder occurs without
a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., afte r a one-time heavy use of the substance), no
accompanying substance use disorder is note d (e.g., F15.94 amphetamine-induced bipolar
and related disorder, with onset during into xication). When more than one substance is
judged to play a significant role in the development of bipolar mood symptoms, each
should be listed separately (e.g., F15.24 severe methylphenidate use disorder with meth-
ylphenidate-induced bipolar and related disorder, with onset during intoxication; F19.94
dexamethasone-induced bipolar and related di sorder, with onset during intoxication).
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic features of substance/medication -induced bipolar and related disorder are es-
sentially the same as those for mania, hypomania, or depression . A key exception to the diag-
nosis of substance/medication-induced bipolar an d related disorder is the case of hypomania
or mania that occurs after antidepressant medi cation use or other treatments and persists be-
yond the physiological effects of the medication. This condition is considered an indicator of
true bipolar disorder, not substance/medication -induced bipolar and re lated disorder. Simi-
larly, individuals with apparent electroconvulsive therapy–induced manic or hypomanic ep-
isodes that persist beyond th e physiological effects of the treatment are diagnosed with
bipolar disorder, not substance/medication -induced bipolar and related disorder. 
Side effects of some antidepressants and ot her psychotropic drugs (e.g., edginess, ag-
itation) may resemble the primary symptoms  of a manic syndrome, but they are funda-
mentally distinct from bipolar symptoms and are insufficient for the diagnosis. That is, the
criterion symptoms of mania/hypomania have specificity (simple agitation is not the same
as excess involvement in purposeful activiti es), and a sufficient number of symptoms
must be present (not just one or two symptoms ) to make these diagnoses. In particular, the
appearance of one or two nons pecific symptoms—irri tability, edginess, or agitation during
antidepressant treatment—in the absence of  a full manic or hypomanic syndrome should
not be taken to support a diagnosis of a bipolar disorder.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Etiology (causally related to the use of psychotropic medications or substances of abuse
based on best clinical evidence) is the key variab le in this etiologically specified form of bi-
polar disorder. Substances/medications that are typically considered to be associated
with substance/medication-induced bipolar and related diso rder include the stimulant
class of drugs, as well as phencyclidine and steroids; however, a numb er of potential sub-
stances continue to emerge as new compounds are synthesized (e.g., so-calle d bath salts).
A history of such substance use may help increase diagnostic certainty.
Prevalence
There are no epidemiological studies of substance/medication-induced mania or bipolar
disorder. Each etiological substance may have its own individual risk of inducing a bipo-
lar (manic/hypomanic) disorder.
Development and Course
In phencyclidine-induced mania, the initial pres entation may be one of a delirium with af-
fective features, which then becomes an atyp ically appearing manic or mixed manic state.
Bipolar and Related Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 145
This condition follows the ingestion or inhalati on quickly, usually within hours or, at the
most, a few days. In stimulant-induced manic or  hypomanic states, the response is in min-
utes to 1 hour after one or several ingestions  or injections. The episode is very brief and
typically resolves over 1–2 days. With co rticosteroids and some immunosuppressant
medications, the mania (or mixed or depressed state) usually follows several days of in-
gestion, and the higher doses appear to have a much greate r likelihood of producing bi-
polar symptoms. 
Diagnostic Markers
Determination of the substance of use can be made through markers in the blood or urine
to corroborate diagnosis.
Differential Diagnosis
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder should be differentiated
from other bipolar disorders, substance into xication or substance-induced delirium, and
medication side effects (as noted earlier). A full manic episode that emerges during anti-
depressant treatment (e.g., medication, electr oconvulsive therapy) but persists at a fully
syndromal level beyond the physiological effect of that treatment is sufficient evidence for
a bipolar I diagnosis. A full hypomanic episode  that emerges during antidepressant treat-
ment (e.g., medication, electroconvulsive therap y) but persists at a fully syndromal level
beyond the physiological effect of that treatme nt is sufficient evidence for a bipolar II di-
agnosis only if preceded by a major depressive episode.
Comorbidity
Comorbidities are those associated with the use of illicit substances (in the case of illegal
stimulants or phencyclidine) or diversion of prescribed stimulants. Comorbidities related
to steroid or immunosuppre ssant medications are those medical indications for these
preparations. Delirium can occur before or along with manic symptoms in individuals in-
gesting phencyclidine or those who are prescr ibed steroid medications or other immuno-
suppressant medications.
Bipolar and Related Disorder
 Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A prominent and persistent period of abnormall y elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
and abnormally increased activity or energy that predominates in the clinical picture. 
B. There is evidence from the history, physical ex amination, or laboratory findings that the dis-
turbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition. 
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium. 
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioni ng, or necessitates hospitalization to pre-
vent harm to self or others, or there are psychotic features.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code for bipolar and related disorder due to another medical
condition is 293.83, which is assigned regardless of the specifier. The ICD-10-CM code
depends on the specifier (see below).
146 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Specify if: 
(F06.33) With manic features:  Full criteria are not met for a manic or hypomanic ep-
isode.
(F06.33) With manic- or hypomanic-like episode:  Full criteria are met except Crite-
rion D for a manic episode or except Criterion F for a hypomanic episode.
(F06.34) With mixed features:  Symptoms of depression are also present but do not
predominate in the clinical picture.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the mental
disorder (e.g., 293.83 [F06.33] bipolar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with manic fea-
tures). The other medical condition should also be coded and listed separately immedi-
ately before the bipolar and related disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 242.90
[E05.90] hyperthyroidism; 293.83 [F06.33] bipol ar disorder due to hyperthyroidism, with
manic features).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of bipolar and related disorder due to anothe r medical condition are
presence of a prominent and persistent period of abnormally elevated, expansive, or irri-
table mood and abnormally increased activity or energy predominating in the clinical pic-
ture that is attributable to another medical condition (Criterion B). In most cases the manic
or hypomanic picture may appear during the in itial presentation of the medical condition
(i.e., within 1 month); howeve r, there are exceptions, especi ally in chronic medical condi-
tions that might worsen or relapse and herald  the appearance of the manic or hypomanic
picture. Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition would not be diag-
nosed when the manic or hypomanic episodes definitely preceded the medical condition,
since the proper diagnosis would be bipolar disorder (except in the unusual circumstance
in which all preceding manic or hypomanic episodes—or, when only one such episode has
occurred, the preceding manic or hypomanic episode—were associated with ingestion of
a substance/medication). The diagnosis of bipolar and related disorder due to another
medical condition should not be made during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The
manic or hypomanic episode in  bipolar and related disorder due to another medical con-
dition must cause clinically significant dist ress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of fu nctioning to qualify for this diagnosis (Criterion E).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Etiology (i.e., a causal relationship to anothe r medical condition based on best clinical ev-
idence) is the key variable in this etiologically  specified form of bipolar disorder. The list-
ing of medical conditions that are said to be able to induce mania is never complete, and
the clinician’s best judgment is the essence of  this diagnosis. Among the best known of the
medical conditions that can cause a bipolar manic or hypomanic co ndition are Cushing’s
disease and multiple sclerosis, as well as stroke and traumatic brain injuries. 
Development and Course 
Bipolar and related disorder due to another me dical condition usually has its onset acutely
or subacutely within the firs t weeks or month of the onset of the associated medical con-
dition. However, this is not always the case, as a worsening or later relapse of the associ-
ated medical condition may precede the onset of the manic or hypomanic syndrome. The
clinician must make a clinical judgment in these situations about whether the medical con-
dition is causative, based on temporal sequence  as well as plausibility of a causal relation-
Bipolar and Related Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 147
ship. Finally, the condition may remit before or just after the medi cal condition remits,
particularly when treatment of the ma nic/hypomanic symptoms is effective. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Culture-related differences, to the extent that  there is any evidence, pertain to those asso-
ciated with the medical condition (e.g., rates of multiple sclerosis and stroke vary around
the world based on dietary, genetic fact ors, and other environmental factors).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Gender differences pertain to those associat ed with the medical condition (e.g., systemic
lupus erythematosus is more common in fema les; stroke is somewhat more common in
middle-age males compared with females).
Diagnostic Markers
Diagnostic markers pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., steroid
levels in blood or urine to help corroborate the diagnosis of Cushing’s disease, which can
be associated with manic or depressive synd romes; laboratory test s confirming the diag-
nosis of multiple sclerosis).
Functional Consequences of Bipolar and Related 
Disorder Due to Anot her Medical Condition
Functional consequences of the bipolar sy mptoms may exacerbate impairments associ-
ated with the medical condit ion and may incur worse outcom es due to interference with
medical treatment. In general, it is believed, but not established, that the illness, when in-
duced by Cushing’s disease, will not recur if the Cushing’s disease is cured or arrested.
However, it is also suggested, but not establ ished, that mood syndromes, including de-
pressive and manic/hypomanic ones, may be episod ic (i.e., recurring) with static brain in-
juries and other central nervous system diseases.
Differential Diagnosis
Symptoms of delirium, catatonia, and acute anxiety. It is important to differentiate
symptoms of mania from excite d or hypervigilant delirious symptoms; from excited cata-
tonic symptoms; and from agitation related to acute anxiety states. 
Medication-induced depre ssive or manic symptoms. An important differential diag-
nostic observation is that the other medica l condition may be treated with medications
(e.g., steroids or alpha-interferon) that can induce depressive or manic symptoms. In these
cases, clinical judgment using all of the eviden ce in hand is the best way to try to separate
the most likely and/or the most important of two etiological factors (i.e., association with
the medical condition vs. a substance/medicati on-induced syndrome). The differential di-
agnosis of the associated medical conditions is relevant but largely beyond the scope of the
present manual. 
Comorbidity
Conditions comorbid with bipolar and relate d disorder due to anot her medical condition
are those associated with the medical conditio ns of etiological relevance. Delirium can oc-
cur before or along with manic symptoms in individuals with Cushing’s disease.
148 Bipolar and Related Disorders
Other Specified Bipolar and Related Disorder
296.89 (F31.89)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a bipolar and
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any of the disorders in the bipolar and related disorders diagnostic class. The other
specified bipolar and related disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician
chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the cri-
teria for any specific bipolar and related disorder. This is done by recording “other speci-
fied bipolar and related disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “short-duration
cyclothymia”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1.Short-duration hypomanic episodes (2–3 days) and ma jor depressive episodes:  A
lifetime history of one or more major depressive episodes in individuals whose presenta-
tion has never met full criteria for a manic or hypomanic episode but who have experienced
two or more episodes of short-duration hypoma nia that meet the full symptomatic criteria
for a hypomanic episode but that only last for 2–3 days. The episodes of hypomanic symp-
toms do not overlap in time with the major depressive episodes, so the disturbance does
not meet criteria for major depressive episode, with mixed features.
2.Hypomanic episodes with insufficient  symptoms and major depressive epi-
sodes: A lifetime history of one or more major depressive episodes in individuals
whose presentation has never met full criteria for a manic or hypomanic episode but
who have experienced one or more episodes of hypomania that do not meet full symp-
tomatic criteria (i.e., at least 4 consecutive days of elevated mood and one or two of
the other symptoms of a hypomanic episode, or irritable mood and two or three of the
other symptoms of a hypomanic episode). The episodes of hypomanic symptoms do
not overlap in time with the major depressive episodes, so the disturbance does not
meet criteria for major depressive episode, with mixed features.
3.Hypomanic episode without pr ior major depressive episode:  One or more hypo-
manic episodes in an individual whose presentation has never met full criteria for a ma-
jor depressive episode or a manic episode. If this occurs in an individual with an
established diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), both diagnoses
can be concurrently applied during the periods  when the full criteria for a hypomanic
episode are met.
4.Short-duration cyclothymia (less than 24 months):  Multiple episodes of hypomanic
symptoms that do not meet criteria for a hypomanic episode and multiple episodes of de-
pressive symptoms that do not meet criteria for a major depressive episode that persist
over a period of less than 24 months (less than 12 months for children or adolescents)
in an individual whose presen tation has never met full criteria for a major depressive,
manic, or hypomanic episode and does not meet criteria for any psychotic disorder. Dur-
ing the course of the disorder, the hypomanic or depressive symptoms are present for
more days than not, the individual has not been without symptoms for more than 2 months
at a time, and the symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment. 
Unspecified Bipolar and Related Disorder 149
Unspecified Bipolar and Related Disorder
296.80 (F31.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a bipolar and
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any of the disorders in the bipolar and related disorders diagnostic class. The unspec-
ified bipolar and related disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician choos-
es not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific bipolar and related
disorder, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a
more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).
Specifiers for Bipolar and Related Disorders
Specify if:
With anxious distress:  The presence of at least two of the following symptoms during
the majority of days of the current or most recent episode of mania, hypomania, or de-
pression:
1. Feeling keyed up or tense.
2. Feeling unusually restless.
3. Difficulty concentrating because of worry.
4. Fear that something awful may happen.
5. Feeling that the individual might lose control of himself or herself.
Specify current severity:
Mild:  Two symptoms.
Moderate: Three symptoms.
Moderate-severe:  Four or five symptoms.
Severe:  Four or five symptoms with motor agitation.
Note:  Anxious distress has been noted as a prominent feature of both bipolar and
major depressive disorder in both primary care and specialty mental health set-
tings. High levels of anxiety have been associated with higher suicide risk, longer
duration of illness, and greater likelihood of treatment nonresponse. As a result, it
is clinically useful to specify accurately the presence and severity levels of anxious
distress for treatment planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
With mixed features:  The mixed features specifier can apply to the current manic, hy-
pomanic, or depressive episode in bi polar I or bipolar II disorder:
Manic or hypomanic episode, with mixed features:
A. Full criteria are met for a manic episode or hypomanic episode, and at least
three of the following symptoms are present during the majority of days of the
current or most recent episode of mania or hypomania:
1. Prominent dysphoria or depressed mood as indicated by either subjective
report (e.g., feels sad or empty) or observation made by others (e.g., ap-
pears tearful).
2. Diminished interest or pleasure in all, or almost all, activities (as indicated by
either subjective account or observation made by others).
3. Psychomotor retardation nearly every day (observable by others; not merely
subjective feelings of being slowed down).
150 Bipolar and Related Disorders
4. Fatigue or loss of energy.
5. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (not merely
self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
6. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ide-
ation without a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for com-
mitting suicide.
B. Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent a change from the
person’s usual behavior.
C. For individuals whose symptoms meet full episode criteria for both mania and
depression simultaneously, the diagnosis should be manic episode, with mixed
features, due to the marked impairment and clinical severity of full mania.
D. The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a sub-
stance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment).
Depressive episode, wit h mixed features: 
A. Full criteria are met for a major depressive episode, and at least three of the fol-
lowing manic/hypomanic symptoms are present during the majority of days of
the current or most recent episode of depression:
1. Elevated, expansive mood.
2. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Increase in energy or goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school,
or sexually).
6. Increased or excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential
for painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees,
sexual indiscretions, or foolish business investments).
7. Decreased need for sleep (feeling rested despite sleeping less than usual;
to be contrasted with insomnia).
B. Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent a change from the
person’s usual behavior.
C. For individuals whose symptoms meet full episode criteria for both mania and
depression simultaneously, the diagnosis should be manic episode, with mixed
features.
D. The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a sub-
stance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, or other treatment).
Note:  Mixed features associated with a major depressive episode have been found
to be a significant risk factor for the development of bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
As a result, it is clinically useful to note the presence of this specifier for treatment
planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
With rapid cycling  (can be applied to bipolar I or bipolar II disorder): Presence of at
least four mood episodes in the previous 12 months that meet the criteria for manic,
hypomanic, or major depressive episode.
Note:  Episodes are demarcated by either partial or full remissions of at least 2 months
or a switch to an episode of the opposite polarity (e.g., major depressive episode to
manic episode).
Note:  The essential feature of a rapid-cycli ng bipolar disorder is the occurrence of
at least four mood episodes during the previous 12 months. These episodes can
occur in any combination and order. The episodes must meet both the duration and
Specifiers for Bipolar and Related Disorders 151
symptom number criteria for a major depressive, manic, or hypomanic episode and
must be demarcated by either a period of full remission or a switch to an episode
of the opposite polarity. Manic and hypomanic episodes are counted as being on
the same pole. Except for the fact that they occur more frequently, the episodes that
occur in a rapid-cycling pattern are no different from those that occur in a non-rapid-
cycling pattern. Mood episodes that count toward defining a rapid-cycling pattern
exclude those episodes directly caused by a substance (e.g., cocaine, corticoste-
roids) or another medical condition.
With melancholic features:
A. One of the following is present during the most severe period of the current episode:
1. Loss of pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
2. Lack of reactivity to usually pleasurable stimuli (does not feel much better, even
temporarily, when something good happens).
B. Three (or more) of the following:
1. A distinct quality of depressed mood characterized by profound despondency,
despair, and/or moroseness or by so-called empty mood.
2. Depression that is regularly worse in the morning.
3. Early-morning awakening (i.e., at least 2 hours before usual awakening).
4. Marked psychomotor agitation or retardation.
5. Significant anorexia or weight loss.
6. Excessive or inappropriate guilt.
Note:  The specifier “with melancholic features” is applied if these features are pres-
ent at the most severe stage of the episode. There is a near-complete absence of
the capacity for pleasure, not merely a diminution. A guideline for evaluating the
lack of reactivity of mood is that even highly desired events are not associated with
marked brightening of mood. Either mood does not brighten at all, or it brightens
only partially (e.g., up to 20%–40% of normal for only minutes at a time). The “dis-
tinct quality” of mood that is characteristic of the “with melancholic features” speci-
fier is experienced as qualitatively different from that during a nonmelancholic
depressive episode. A depressed mood that is described as merely more severe,
longer lasting, or present without a reason is  not considered distinct in quality. Psy-
chomotor changes are nearly always present and are observable by others.
Melancholic features exhibit only a modest tendency to repeat across episodes
in the same individual. They are more frequent in inpatients, as opposed to outpa-
tients; are less likely to occur in milder than in more severe major depressive epi-
sodes; and are more likely to occur in those with psychotic features.
With atypical features:  This specifier can be applied when these features predomi-
nate during the majority of days of the current or most recent major depressive epi-
sode. 
A. Mood reactivity (i.e., mood brightens in response to actual or potential positive
events).
B. Two (or more) of the following features: 
1. Significant weight gain or increase in appetite.
2. Hypersomnia.
3. Leaden paralysis (i.e., heavy, leaden feelings in arms or legs).
4. A long-standing pattern of interpersonal rejection sensitivity (not limited to epi-
sodes of mood disturbance) that results in significant social or occupational
impairment.
152 Bipolar and Related Disorders
C. Criteria are not met for “with melancholic  features” or “with catatonia” during the
same episode.
Note:  “Atypical depression” has historical significance (i.e., atypical in contradis-
tinction to the more classical agitated, “endogenous” presentations of depression
that were the norm when depression was rarely diagnosed in outpatients and al-
most never in adolescents or younger adults) and today does not connote an un-
common or unusual clinical presentation as the term might imply.
Mood reactivity is the capacity to be cheered up when presented with positive
events (e.g., a visit from children, compliments from others). Mood may become
euthymic (not sad) even for extended periods of time if the external circumstances
remain favorable. Increased appetite may be manifested by an obvious increase in
food intake or by weight gain. Hypersomnia may include either an extended period
of nighttime sleep or daytime napping that totals at least 10 hours of sleep per day
(or at least 2 hours more than when not depressed). Leaden paralysis is defined as
feeling heavy, leaden, or weighted down, usually in the arms or legs. This sensation
is generally present for at least an hour a day but often lasts for many hours at a
time. Unlike the other atypical features, pathological sensitivity to perceived inter-
personal rejection is a trait that has an early onset and persists throughout most of
adult life. Rejection sensitivity occurs both when the person is and is not depressed,
though it may be exacerbated during depressive periods.
With psychotic features:  Delusions or hallucinations are present at any time in the
episode. If psychotic features are present, specify if mood-congruent or mood-incon-
gruent:
With mood-congruent psychotic features: During manic episodes, the con-
tent of all delusions and hallucinations is consistent with the typical manic
themes of grandiosity, invulnerability, etc., but may also include themes of sus-
piciousness or paranoia, especially with respect to others’ doubts about the in-
dividual’s capacities, accomplishments, and so forth.
With mood-incongruent  psychotic features:  The content of delusions and
hallucinations is inconsistent with the episode polarity themes as described
above, or the content is a mixture of mood-incongruent and mood-congruent
themes.
With catatonia:  This specifier can apply to an episode of mania or depression if cata-
tonic features are present during most of the episode. See criteria for catatonia asso-
ciated with a mental disorder in the chapter “Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other
Psychotic Disorders.”
With peripartum onset: This specifier can be applied to the current or, if the full crite-
ria are not currently met for a mood episode, most recent episode of mania, hypoma-
nia, or major depression in bipolar I or bipol ar II disorder if onset of mood symptoms
occurs during pregnancy or in the 4 weeks following delivery.
Note:  Mood episodes can have their onset either during pregnancy or postpartum.
Although the estimates differ according to the period of follow-up after delivery, be-
tween 3% and 6% of women will experience the onset of a major depressive epi-
sode during pregnancy or in the weeks or months following delivery. Fifty percent
of “postpartum” major depressive episodes actually begin prior to delivery. Thus,
these episodes are referred to collectively as peripartum episodes. Women with
peripartum major depressive episodes often have severe anxiety and even panic
attacks. Prospective studies have demonstrated that mood and anxiety symptoms
during pregnancy, as well as the “baby blues,” increase the risk for a postpartum
major depressive episode.
Specifiers for Bipolar and Related Disorders 153
Peripartum-onset mood episodes can pres ent either with or without psychotic
features. Infanticide is most often associated with postpartum psychotic episodes
that are characterized by command hallucinations to kill the infant or delusions that
the infant is possessed, but psychotic symptoms can also occur in severe postpar-
tum mood episodes without such specific delusions or hallucinations.
Postpartum mood (major depressive or manic) episodes with psychotic features
appear to occur in from 1 in 500 to 1 in 1,000 deliveries and may be more common
in primiparous women. The risk of postpartum episodes with psychotic features is
particularly increased for women with prior postpartum mood episodes but is also
elevated for those with a prior history of a depressive or bipolar disorder (especially
bipolar I disorder) and those with a family history of bipolar disorders.
Once a woman has had a postpartum episode with psychotic features, the risk
of recurrence with each subsequent delivery is between 30% and 50%. Postpartum
episodes must be differentiated from delirium occurring in the postpartum period,
which is distinguished by a fluctuating level of awareness or attention. The postpar-
tum period is unique with respect to the degree of neuroendocrine alterations and
psychosocial adjustments, the potential impact of breast-feeding on treatment plan-
ning, and the long-term implications of a history of postpartum mood disorder on sub-
sequent family planning.
With seasonal pattern:  This specifier applies to the lifetime pattern of mood episodes.
The essential feature is a regular seasonal pattern of at least one type of episode (i.e.,
mania, hypomania, or depression). The other types of episodes may not follow this pat-
tern. For example, an individual may have seasonal manias, but his or her depressions
do not regularly occur at a specific time of year.
A. There has been a regular temporal relationship between the onset of manic, hypo-
manic, or major depressive episodes and a particular time of the year (e.g., in the
fall or winter) in bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
Note:  Do not include cases in which there is an obvious effect of seasonally related
psychosocial stressors (e.g., regularly being unemployed every winter). 
B. Full remissions (or a change from major depression to mania or hypomania or vice
versa) also occur at a characteristic time of the year (e.g., depression disappears
in the spring).
C. In the last 2 years, the individual’s manic, hypomanic, or major depressive episodes
have demonstrated a temporal seasonal relationship, as defined above, and no
non-seasonal episodes of that polarity have occurred during that 2-year period.
D. Seasonal manias, hypomanias, or depressions (as described above) substantially
outnumber any nonseasonal manias, hypomanias, or depressions that may have
occurred over the individual’s lifetime.
Note:  This specifier can be applied to the pattern of major depressive episodes in
bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, or  major depressive disorder, recurrent. The
essential feature is the onset and remission of major depressive episodes at char-
acteristic times of the year. In most cases, the episodes begin in fall or winter and
remit in spring. Less commonly, there may be recurrent summer depressive epi-
sodes. This pattern of onset and remission of episodes must have occurred during
at least a 2-year period, without any nonseasonal episodes occurring during this
period. In addition, the seasonal depressi ve episodes must substantially outnum-
ber any nonseasonal depressive episodes over the individual’s lifetime.
This specifier does not apply to those situations in which the pattern is better ex-
plained by seasonally linked psychosocial stressors (e.g., seasonal unemployment
or school schedule). Major depressive episodes that occur in a seasonal pattern
154 Bipolar and Related Disorders
are often characterized by prominent energy, hypersomnia, overeating, weight
gain, and a craving for carbohydrates. It is unclear whether a seasonal pattern is
more likely in recurrent major depressive di sorder or in bipolar disorders. However,
within the bipolar disorders group, a seasonal pattern appears to be more likely in
bipolar II disorder than in bipolar I disorder. In some individuals, the onset of manic
or hypomanic episodes may also be linked to a particular season.
The prevalence of winter-type seasonal pattern appears to vary with latitude,
age, and sex. Prevalence increases with higher  latitudes. Age is also a strong pre-
dictor of seasonality, with younger persons at higher risk for winter depressive epi-
sodes.
Specify if:
In partial remission: Symptoms of the immediately previous manic, hypomanic, or
depressive episode are present, but full criteria are not met, or there is a period lasting
less than 2 months without any significant symptoms of a manic, hypomanic, or major
depressive episode following the end of such an episode.
In full remission:  During the past 2 months, no significant signs or symptoms of the
disturbance were present.
Specify current severity: 
Severity is based on the number of criterion symptoms, the severity of those symptoms,
and the degree of functional disability.
Mild:  Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to meet the diagnostic criteria
are present, the intensity of the symptoms is distressing but manageable, and the
symptoms result in minor impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Moderate: The number of symptoms, intensity of symptoms, and/or functional impair-
ment are between those specified for “mild” and “severe.”
Severe:  The number of symptoms is substantially in excess of those required to make
the diagnosis, the intensity of the symptoms is seriously distressing and unmanage-
able, and the symptoms markedly interfere with social and occupational functioning.