155Depressive
Disorders
Depressive disorders  include disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, major
depressive disorder (including  major depressive episode), persistent depressive disorder
(dysthymia), premenstrual dysphoric disord er, substance/medication-induced depres-
sive disorder, depressive disord er due to another medical co ndition, other specified de-
pressive disorder, and unspec ified depressive disorder. Unlike in DSM-IV, this chapter
“Depressive Disorders” has been separated fr om the previous chapter “Bipolar and Re-
lated Disorders.” The common feature of all of these disorders is the presence of sad,
empty, or irritable mood, accompanied by somatic and cognitive changes that signifi-
cantly affect the individual’s capacity to function. What differs among them are issues of
duration, timing, or presumed etiology. 
In order to address concerns about the pote ntial for the overdiagnosis of and treatment
for bipolar disorder in children, a new diagno sis, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,
referring to the presentation of children wi th persistent irritability and frequent episodes
of extreme behavioral dyscontrol, is added to the depressive disorders for children up to
12 years of age. Its placement in this chapter reflects the finding that children with this
symptom pattern typica lly develop unipolar depressive disorders or anxiety disorders,
rather than bipolar disorders, as they  mature into adolescence and adulthood.
Major depressive disorder represents the clas sic condition in this gr oup of disorders. It
is characterized by discrete episodes of at least 2 weeks’ duration (although most episodes
last considerably longer) involving clear-cut changes in affect, cogn ition, and neurovege-
tative functions and inter-episode remissions.  A diagnosis based on a single episode is
possible, although the disorder is a recurrent one in the majori ty of cases. Careful consid-
eration is given to the delineation of normal sadness and grief from a major depressive ep-
isode. Bereavement may induce great suffering, but it does not typically induce an episode
of major depressive disorder. When they do occur together, the depressive symptoms and
functional impairment tend to be more seve re and the prognosis is worse compared with
bereavement that is not accompanied by majo r depressive disorder. Bereavement-related
depression tends to occur in persons with other vulnerabilities to depressive disorders,
and recovery may be facilitated by antidepressant treatment.
A more chronic form of depression, persiste nt depressive disorder  (dysthymia), can be
diagnosed when the mood disturbance continues for at least 2 years in adults or 1 year in
children. This diagnosis, new in DSM-5, includes both the DSM-IV diagnostic categories of
chronic major depression and dysthymia.
After careful scientific review of the evid ence, premenstrual dy sphoric disorder has
been moved from an appendix of DSM-IV (“ Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further
Study”) to Section II of DSM-5. Almost 20 years of additional of research on this condition
has confirmed a specific and treatment-responsi ve form of depressive  disorder that begins
sometime following ovulation and remits within a few days of menses and has a marked
impact on functioning.
A large number of substances of abuse, some prescribed medi cations, and several
medical conditions can be associated with de pression-like phenomena. This fact is recog-
nized in the diagnoses of substance/medicati on-induced depressive disorder and depres-
sive disorder due to an other medical condition.
156 Depressive Disorders
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 296.99 (F34.8)
A. Severe recurrent temper outbursts manifested verbally (e.g., verbal rages) and/or be-
haviorally (e.g., physical aggression toward people or property) that are grossly out of
proportion in intensity or duration to the situation or provocation. 
B. The temper outbursts are inconsistent with developmental level.
C. The temper outbursts occur, on aver age, three or more times per week.
D. The mood between temper outbursts is persistently irritable or angry most of the day,
nearly every day, and is observable by others (e.g., parents, teachers, peers).
E. Criteria A–D have been present for 12 or more months. Throughout that time, the indi-
vidual has not had a period lasting 3 or more consecutive months without all of the
symptoms in Criteria A–D.
F. Criteria A and D are present in at least two of three settings (i.e., at home, at school,
with peers) and are severe in at least one of these.
G. The diagnosis should not be made for the first time before age 6 years or after age 18
years. 
H. By history or observation, the age at onset of Criteria A–E is before 10 years.
I. There has never been a distinct period lasting more than 1 day during which the full
symptom criteria, except duration, fo r a manic or hypomanic episode have been met.
Note:  Developmentally appropriate mood elevation, such as occurs in the context of a
highly positive event or its anticipation, should not be considered as a symptom of ma-
nia or hypomania.
J. The behaviors do not occur exclusively during an episode of major depressive disorder
and are not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., autism spectrum disor-
der, posttraumatic stress disorder, separat ion anxiety disorder, persistent depressive
disorder [dysthymia]).
Note:  This diagnosis cannot coexist with oppositional defiant disorder, intermittent ex-
plosive disorder, or bipolar disorder, though it can coexist with others, including major
depressive disorder, attention-deficit/hy peractivity disorder, conduct disorder, and
substance use disorders. Individuals whose symptoms meet criteria for both disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder and oppositional defiant disorder should only be given the
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. If an individual has ever experi-
enced a manic or hypomanic episode, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder should not be assigned. 
K. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or to an-
other medical or neurological condition.
Diagnostic Features
The core feature of disruptive mood dysregulat ion disorder is chronic, severe persistent ir-
ritability. This severe irritability has two prominent clinical mani festations, the first of
which is frequent temper outbursts. These ou tbursts typically occur in response to frus-
tration and can be verbal or behavioral (the la tter in the form of aggression against prop-
erty, self, or others). They must occur frequent ly (i.e., on average, three or more times per
week) (Criterion C) over at least 1 year in at least two settings (Criteria E and F), such as in
the home and at school, and th ey must be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B).
The second manifestation of severe irritability consists of chronic, persistently irritable or
angry mood that is present between the severe temper outbursts. This irritable or angry
mood must be characteristic of the child, bein g present most of the day, nearly every day,
and noticeable by others in the child’s environment (Criterion D). 
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder 157
The clinical presentation of disruptive mo od dysregulation disord er must be carefully
distinguished from presentations of other, re lated conditions, particularly pediatric bi-
polar disorder. In fact, disruptive mood dy sregulation disorder was added to DSM-5 to
address the considerable concern about the appropriate classification and treatment of
children who present with chronic, persistent irritability relative to children who present
with classic (i.e., episo dic) bipolar disorder. 
Some researchers view severe, non-episodic ir ritability as characteristic of bipolar dis-
order in children, although both DSM-IV and DSM-5 require that both children and adults
have distinct episodes of mania or hypomania to qualify for the diagnosis of bipolar I dis-
order. During the latter decades of the 20th century, this contention by researchers that
severe, nonepisodic irritability is a manifestat ion of pediatric mania coincided with an up-
surge in the rates at which clinicians assigned the diagnosis of bipolar disorder to their
pediatric patients. This sharp increase in rates appears to be attributab le to clinicians com-
bining at least two clinical presentations into a single category. That is, both classic, epi-
sodic presentations of mania and non-episodic  presentations of severe irritability have
been labeled as bipolar disorder in children. In DSM-5, the term bipolar disorder  is explicitly
reserved for episodic presentations of bipolar symptoms. DSM-IV did not include a diagno-
sis designed to capture youths whose hallmar k symptoms consisted of very severe, non-
episodic irritability, whereas DSM-5, with the inclusion of disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder, provides a distinct ca tegory for such presentations. 
Prevalence
Disruptive mood dysregulatio n disorder is common among children presenting to pedi-
atric mental health clinics. Prevalence estima tes of the disorder in the community are un-
clear. Based on rates of chronic and severe pe rsistent irritability, which is the core feature
of the disorder, the overall 6-month to 1-year period-prevale nce of disruptive mood dys-
regulation disorder among children and adolescents probably falls in the 2%–5% range.
However, rates are expected to be higher in males and school-age children than in females
and adolescents. 
Development and Course
The onset of disruptive mood dysregulation diso rder must be before age 10 years, and the
diagnosis should not be applied to children with a developmental age of less than 6 years.
It is unknown whether the condition presents only in this age-delimited fashion. Because
the symptoms of disruptive mood dysregulat ion disorder are likely to change as children
mature, use of the diagnosis shou ld be restricted to age grou ps similar to those in which
validity has been established (7–18 years). A pproximately half of children with severe,
chronic irritability will have a presentation that  continues to meet crit eria for the condition
1 year later. Rates of conversion from seve re, nonepisodic irritability to bipolar disorder
are very low. Instead, children with chronic irritability are at risk to develop unipolar de-
pressive and/or anxiety disorders in adulthood. 
Age-related variations also differentiate cl assic bipolar disorder  and disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder. Rates of bipolar disorder generally are very low prior to adoles-
cence (<1%), with a steady increase into early adulthood (1%–2% prevalence). Disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder is more common th an bipolar disorder prior to adolescence,
and symptoms of the condition generally be come less common as children transition into
adulthood. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Children with chronic irritability typically exhibit complicated psy-
chiatric histories. In such children, a relati vely extensive history of chronic irritability is
158 Depressive Disorders
common, typically manifesting be fore full criteria for the syndrome are met. Such predi-
agnostic presentations may have qualified for a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder.
Many children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder have symptoms that also
meet criteria for atte ntion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder  (ADHD) and for an anxiety dis-
order, with such diagnoses often being presen t from a relatively early age. For some chil-
dren, the criteria for major depres sive disorder may also be met. 
Genetic and physiological. In terms of familial aggregat ion and genetics, it has been
suggested that children presenting with chronic, non-episodic irritability can be differen-
tiated from children with bipolar disorder in  their family-based risk. However, these two
groups do not differ in familial rates of anxi ety disorders, unipolar  depressive disorders,
or substance abuse. Compared with children with pediatric bipolar disorder or other men-
tal illnesses, those with disruptive mood dy sregulation disorder exhibit both commonal-
ities and differences in information-proce ssing deficits. For example, face-emotion
labeling deficits, as well as perturbed decision  making and cognitive control, are present in
children with bipolar disorder and chronica lly irritable children, as well as in children
with some other psychiatric conditions. There is also evidence for disorder-specific dys-
function, such as during tasks assessing atte ntion deployment in response to emotional
stimuli, which has demonstrated unique signs of dysfunction in children with chronic ir-
ritability. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Children presenting to clinics with features of  disruptive mood dysr egulation disorder are
predominantly male. Among co mmunity samples, a male pr eponderance appears to be
supported. This difference in prevalence betw een males and females differentiates disrup-
tive mood dysregulation disord er from bipolar disorder, in which there is an equal gender
prevalence.
Suicide Risk
In general, evidence documenting suicidal be havior and aggression, as well as other se-
vere functional consequences, in disruptive mood dysregulation diso rder should be noted
when evaluating children with chronic irritability. 
Functional Consequences of 
Disruptive Mood Dy sregulation Disorder
Chronic, severe irritability, su ch as is seen in disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, is
associated with marked disruption in a child’ s family and peer relationships, as well as in
school performance. Because of their extrem ely low frustration tole rance, such children
generally have difficulty succeeding in school; they are often unable to participate in the
activities typically enjoyed by healthy children;  their family life is severely disrupted by
their outbursts and irritability; and they have trouble initiating or sustaining friendships.
Levels of dysfunction in childr en with bipolar disorder and disruptive mood  dysregulation
disorder are generally comparable. Both condit ions cause severe disruption in the lives of
the affected individual and their families. In  both disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
and pediatric bipolar disorder, dangerous behavi or, suicidal ideation or suicide attempts,
severe aggression, and psychiatric hospitalization are common.
Differential Diagnosis
Because chronically irritable children and adolescents typically present with complex histo-
ries, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysreg ulation disorder must be made while consid-
ering the presence or absence of multiple ot her conditions. Despite the need to consider
Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder 159
many other syndromes, differentiation of disr uptive mood dysregulation disorder from bi-
polar disorder and oppositional  defiant disorder requires pa rticularly careful assessment. 
Bipolar disorders. The central feature differentiating disruptive mood dysregulation disor-
der and bipolar disorders in children involves the longitudinal course of the core symptoms. In
children, as in adults, bipolar I disorder and bipo lar II disorder manifest as an episodic illness
with discrete episodes of mood perturbation that can be differentiated from the child’s typical
presentation. The mood perturbation that occurs  during a manic episode is distinctly different
from the child’s usual mood. In addition, during a manic episode, the change in mood must be
accompanied by the onset, or worsening, of associated cognitive, behavioral, and physical
symptoms (e.g., distractibility, increased goal-dir ected activity), which are also present to a de-
gree that is distinctly different from the child’s  usual baseline. Thus, in the case of a manic ep-
isode, parents (and, depending on  developmental level, children) should be able to identify a
distinct time period during which the child’s  mood and behavior were markedly different
from usual. In contrast, the irritability of disr uptive mood dysregulation disorder is persistent
and is present over many months; while it may wax and wane to a certain degree, severe irri-
tability is characteristic of the child with disr uptive mood dysregulation disorder. Thus, while
bipolar disorders are episodic conditions, disrup tive mood dysregulation disorder is not. In
fact, the diagnosis of di sruptive mood dysregulation disorder  cannot be assi gned to a child
who has ever experienced a full-duration hypoma nic or manic episode (irritable or euphoric)
or who has ever had a manic or hypomanic epis ode lasting more than 1 day. Another central
differentiating feature between bipolar disorder s and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
is the presence of elevated or expansive mood and grandiosity. These symptoms are common
features of mania but are not characteristic of disruptive mood dy sregulation disorder. 
Oppositional defiant disorder. While symptoms of opposition al defiant disorder typi-
cally do occur in children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, mood symptoms
of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder ar e relatively rare in children with opposi-
tional defiant disorder. The key features that warrant the diagnosis of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder in children whose sympto ms also meet criteria  for oppositional de-
fiant disorder are the presence of severe an d frequently recurrent outbursts and a persis-
tent disruption in mood betw een outbursts. In addition, the diagnosis of disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder requires severe impairment in at least one setting (i.e., home,
school, or among peers) and mild  to moderate impairment in a second setting. For this rea-
son, while most children whose symptoms meet  criteria for disrup tive mood dysregula-
tion disorder will also have a presentation that meets criteria fo r oppositional defiant
disorder, the reverse is not the case. That is, in only approximately 15% of individuals with
oppositional defiant disorder would criteria  for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
be met. Moreover, even for child ren in whom criteria for both disorders are met, only the
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be made. Finally, both the
prominent mood symptoms in disruptive mood  dysregulation disorder and the high risk
for depressive and anxiety disorders in follow -up studies justify placement of disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder among the depr essive disorders in DSM-5. (Oppositional
defiant disorder is included in the chapter “Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct
Disorders.”) This reflects the more prominent mood comp onent among individuals with
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, as compared with individuals with oppositional
defiant disorder. Nevertheless, it  also should be noted that disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder appears to carry a high risk for be havioral pr oblems as well as mood problems.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, ma jor depressive disorder, anxiety disorders,
and autism spectrum disorder. Unlike children diagnosed with bipolar disorder or op-
positional defiant disorder, a child whose sy mptoms meet criteria for disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder also can receive a co morbid diagnosis of ADHD, major depressive
disorder, and/or anxiety disorder. However, children whose irritability is present only in
the context of a major depressive episode or persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia)
160 Depressive Disorders
should receive one of those di agnoses rather than disrupti ve mood dysregulation disor-
der. Children with disruptive mood dysregul ation disorder may have symptoms that also
meet criteria for an anxiety disorder and can receive both diagnoses, but children whose ir-
ritability is manifest only in the context of exacerbation of an anxiety disorder should re-
ceive the relevant anxiety disorder diagnosis rather than disruptive  mood dysregulation
disorder. In addition, children  with autism spectrum diso rders frequently present with
temper outbursts when, for example, their rout ines are disturbed. In that instance, the
temper outbursts would be considered secondary to the au tism spectrum disorder, and
the child should not receive the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. 
Intermittent explosive disorder. Children with symptoms su ggestive of intermittent
explosive disorder present with instances of severe temper outburst s, much like children
with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. However, unlike disruptive mood dysreg-
ulation disorder, intermittent explosive disorder does not re quire persistent disruption in
mood between outbursts. In addition, intermittent explosive disorder requires only 3 months
of active symptoms, in contrast to the 12- month requirement for disruptive mood dys-
regulation disorder. Thus, these two diagnoses should not be made in the same child. For
children with outbursts and intercurrent, persis tent irritability, only the diagnosis of dis-
ruptive mood dysregulation disorder should be made. 
Comorbidity
Rates of comorbidity in disruptive mood dysr egulation disorder are extremely high. It is
rare to find individuals whose symptoms meet  criteria for disrupti ve mood dysregulation
disorder alone. Comorbidity between disrupti ve mood dysregulatio n disorder and other
DSM-defined syndromes appears higher than for many other pediatric mental illnesses;
the strongest overlap is with oppositional de fiant disorder. Not only  is the overall rate of
comorbidity high in disruptive mood dysregul ation disorder, but also the range of comor-
bid illnesses appears particularly diverse. These children typically present to the clinic
with a wide range of disruptive behavior , mood, anxiety, and even autism spectrum
symptoms and diagnoses. Howe ver, children with disruptive  mood dysregulation disor-
der should not have symptoms that meet criter ia for bipolar disorder, as in that context,
only the bipolar disorder di agnosis should be made. If children have symptoms that meet
criteria for oppositional defiant disorder or intermittent explosive disorder and disruptive
mood dysregulation disorder, only the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation disor-
der should be assigned. Also, as noted earlier, the diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregu-
lation disorder should not be assigned if the symptoms occur only in an anxiety-
provoking context, when the routines of a ch ild with autism spectrum disorder or obses-
sive-compulsive disorder are disturbed, or in the context of  a major depressive episode.
Major Depressive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Five (or more) of the following symptoms have been present during the same 2-week
period and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms
is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure.
Note:  Do not include symptoms that are clearly  attributable to another medical condition.
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjec-
tive report (e.g., feels sad, empty, hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g.,
appears tearful). ( Note:  In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in al l, or almost all, activities most of the
day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
Major Depressive Disorder 161
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than
5% of body weight in a month), or decreas e or increase in appetite nearly every day.
(Note:  In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others, not
merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delu-
sional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (ei-
ther by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation with-
out a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or to another
medical condition. 
Note:  Criteria A–C represent a major depressive episode.
Note:  Responses to a significant loss (e.g., bereavement, financial ruin, losses from a nat-
ural disaster, a serious medical illness or disa bility) may include the feelings of intense sad-
ness, rumination about the loss, insomnia, poor appetite, and weight loss noted in Criterion A,
which may resemble a depressive episode. Although such symptoms may be understand-
able or considered appropriate to the loss, the presence of a major depressive episode in
addition to the normal response to a significant loss should also be carefully considered. This
decision inevitably requires the ex ercise of clinical judgment ba sed on the individual’s history
and the cultural norms for the expression of distress in the context of loss.1
D. The occurrence of the major depressive episode is not better explained by schizoaf-
fective disorder, schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or
other specified and unspecified schizophrenia s pectrum and other psychotic disorders.
E. There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode.
Note:  This exclusion does not apply if all of the manic-like or hypomanic-like episodes
are substance-induced or are attributable to  the physiological effects of another med-
ical condition.
1In distinguishing grief from a major depressive episode (MDE), it is useful to consider that in
grief the predominant affect is feelings of emptiness and loss, while in MDE it is persistent
depressed mood and the inability to anticipate happiness or pleasure. The dysphoria in grief is
likely to decrease in intensity over days to weeks and occurs in waves, the so-called pangs of
grief. These waves tend to be associated with thoughts or reminders of the deceased. The
depressed mood of MDE is more persistent and not tied to specific thoughts or preoccupations.
The pain of grief may be accompanied by positi ve emotions and humor th at are uncharacteristic
of the pervasive unhappiness and misery characteristic of MDE. The thought content associated
with grief generally features a preoccupation with thoughts and memories of the deceased,
rather than the self-critical or pessimistic ruminati ons seen in MDE. In grief, self-esteem is gener-
ally preserved, whereas in MDE feelings of wort hlessness and self-loathing are common. If self-
derogatory ideation is present in grief, it ty pically involves perceived failings vis-à-vis the
deceased (e.g., not visiting frequently enough, no t telling the deceased how much he or she was
loved). If a bereaved individual thinks abou t death and dying, such thoughts are generally
focused on the deceased and possibly about “joining” the de ceased, whereas in MDE such
thoughts are focused on ending one’s own life because of feeling worthless, undeserving of life,
or unable to cope with the pain of depression.
162 Depressive Disorders
Coding and Recording Procedures
The diagnostic code for major depressive disorder is based on whether this is a single or
recurrent episode, current severity, presence of psychotic features, and remission status.
Current severity and psychotic features are only indicated if full criteria are currently met
for a major depressive episode. Remission specifiers are only indicated if the full criteria
are not currently met for a major depressive episode. Codes are as follows: 
In recording the name of a diagnosis, terms should be listed in the following order: major
depressive disorder, single or recurrent epis ode, severity/psychotic/remission specifiers,
followed by as many of the following specifiers without codes that apply to the current
episode.
Specify:
With anxious distress (p. 184)
With mixed features (pp. 184–185)
With melancholic features (p. 185)
With atypical features  (pp. 185–186)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 186)
With mood-incongruen t psychotic features  (p. 186)
With catatonia  (p. 186). Coding note:  Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1).
With peripartum onset  (pp. 186–187)
With seasonal pattern (recurrent episode only) (pp. 187–188)
Diagnostic Features 
The criterion symptoms for majo r depressive disorder must be  present nearly every day to
be considered present, with the exception of  weight change and suicidal ideation. De-
pressed mood must be present for most of the day, in addition to being present nearly ev-
ery day. Often insomnia or fatigue is the presenting complaint, and failure to probe for
accompanying depressive symptoms will result in underdiagnosis. Sadness may be de-
nied at first but may be elicit ed through interview or inferred from facial expression and
demeanor. With individuals wh o focus on a somatic complaint, clinicians should de-
termine whether the distress from that comp laint is associated with specific depressive
symptoms. Fatigue and sleep disturbance are present in a high propor tion of cases; psy-
chomotor disturbances are much less common but are indicative of greater overall sever-
ity, as is the presence of delu sional or near-delusional guilt.Severity/course specifier Single episode Recurrent episode*
Mild (p. 188) 296.21 (F32.0) 296.31 (F33.0)
Moderate (p. 188) 296.22 (F32.1) 296.32 (F33.1)
Severe (p. 188) 296.23 (F32.2) 296.33 (F33.2)
With psychotic features** (p. 186) 296.24 (F32.3) 296.34 (F33.3)
In partial remission (p. 188) 296.25 (F32.4) 296.35 (F33.41)
In full remission (p. 188) 296.26 (F32.5) 296.36 (F33.42)
Unspecified 296.20 (F32.9) 296.30 (F33.9)
*For an episode to be considered recurrent, there must be an interval  of at least 2 consecutive months
between separate episodes in which criteria are no t met for a major depressive episode. The defini-
tions of specifiers are found on the indicated pages.
**If psychotic features are present,  code the “with psychotic features ” specifier irrespective of epi-
sode severity.
Major Depressive Disorder 163
The essential feature of a major depressive episode is a period of at least 2 weeks during
which there is either depressed mood or the loss of interest or pleasure in nearly all activi-
ties (Criterion A). In children and adolescents,  the mood may be irritable rather than sad.
The individual must also expe rience at least four additional symptoms drawn from a list
that includes changes in appetite or weigh t, sleep, and psychomotor activity; decreased en-
ergy; feelings of worthlessness or guilt; difficulty thinking, co ncentrating, or making deci-
sions; or recurrent thoughts of death or suicid al ideation or suicide plans or attempts. To
count toward a major depressive episode, a sy mptom must either be newly present or must
have clearly worsened compared with the person’s pre- episode status. The symptoms
must persist for most of the day, nearly every day, for at least 2 consecutive weeks. The ep-
isode must be accompanied by clinically signif icant distress or impairment in social, occu-
pational, or other important areas of func tioning. For some in dividuals with milder
episodes, functioning may appear  to be normal but requires markedly increased effort.
The mood in a major depressive episode is of ten described by the person as depressed,
sad, hopeless, discouraged, or “down in the du mps” (Criterion A1). In some cases, sadness
may be denied at first but may subsequently be  elicited by interview (e.g., by pointing out
that the individual looks as if he or she is ab out to cry). In some individuals who complain
of feeling “blah,” having no feelings, or feeling anxious, the presence of a depressed mood
can be inferred from the pers on’s facial expression and de meanor. Some individuals em-
phasize somatic complaints (e.g., bodily aches and pains) rather than reporting feelings of
sadness. Many individuals report or exhibit in creased irritability (e.g.,  persistent anger, a
tendency to respond to events with angry outbursts or blaming ot hers, an exaggerated
sense of frustration over minor matters). In ch ildren and adolescents, an irritable or cranky
mood may develop rather than a sad or dejected mood. This presenta tion should be dif-
ferentiated from a pattern of irritability when frustrated.
Loss of interest or pleasure is nearly always  present, at least to some degree. Individ-
uals may report feeling less interested in hobb ies, “not caring anymore,” or not feeling any
enjoyment in activities that were previously considered pleasurable (Criterion A2). Family
members often notice social withdrawal or ne glect of pleasurable avocations (e.g., a for-
merly avid golfer no longer plays, a child who used to enjoy soccer finds excuses not to
practice). In some individuals,  there is a significant reduction from previous levels of sex-
ual interest or desire.
Appetite change may involve either a redu ction or increase. Some depressed individ-
uals report that they have to force themselv es to eat. Others may eat more and may crave
specific foods (e.g., sweets or other carbohydrates). When appetite changes are severe (in
either direction), there may be a significant loss  or gain in weight, or , in children, a failure
to make expected weight gains may be noted (Criterion A3).
Sleep disturbance may take the form of either difficulty sleepin g or sleeping exces-
sively (Criterion A4). When insomnia is presen t, it typically takes the form of middle in-
somnia (i.e., waking up during the night an d then having difficulty returning to sleep) or
terminal insomnia (i.e., waking too early and be ing unable to return to sleep). Initial in-
somnia (i.e., difficulty falling asleep) may al so occur. Individuals who present with over-
sleeping (hypersomn ia) may experience prolonged sleep episodes at night or increased
daytime sleep. Sometimes the reason that the individual seeks trea tment is for the dis-
turbed sleep.
Psychomotor changes include agitation (e.g., the inabili ty to sit still, pacing, hand-
wringing; or pulling or rubbing of the skin, cl othing, or other objects)  or retardation (e.g.,
slowed speech, thinking, and body movements; increased pauses before answering;
speech that is decreased in vo lume, inflection, amount, or variety of content, or muteness)
(Criterion A5). The psychomotor agitation or retardation must be severe enough to be ob-
servable by others and not repres ent merely subjective feelings.
Decreased energy, tiredness, and fatigue are common (Criterion A6). A person may re-
port sustained fatigue without physical exertion . Even the smallest ta sks seem to require
164 Depressive Disorders
substantial effort. The efficiency with whic h tasks are accomplished may be reduced. For
example, an individual may complain that washing and dressing in the morning are ex-
hausting and take twice as long as usual.
The sense of worthlessness or guilt associated with a major depressive episode may in-
clude unrealistic negative evaluations of one’ s worth or guilty preoccupations or rumina-
tions over minor past failings (Criterion A7). Such individu als often misinterpret neutral
or trivial day-to-day events as  evidence of personal defects and have an exaggerated sense
of responsibility for untoward events. The sens e of worthlessness or guilt may be of delu-
sional proportions (e.g., an individual who is convinced that he or she is personally re-
sponsible for world poverty). Blaming oneself for being sick and for failing to meet
occupational or interpersonal responsibilities as  a result of the depression is very common
and, unless delusional, is not consider ed sufficient to meet this criterion.
Many individuals report impaired ability to  think, concentrate, or make even minor
decisions (Criterion A8). They may appear ea sily distracted or complain of memory diffi-
culties. Those engaged in cogn itively demanding pursuits are often unable to function. In
children, a precipitous drop in grades may reflect poor concentratio n. In elderly individ-
uals, memory difficulties may be the chief co mplaint and may be mistaken for early signs
of a dementia (“pseudodementia”). When th e major depressive ep isode is successfully
treated, the memory problems often fully abate. However, in some individuals, particu-
larly elderly persons, a major depressive ep isode may sometimes be the initial presenta-
tion of an irreve rsible dementia.
Thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, or suicide attempts (Cri terion A9) are common.
They may range from a passive wish not to aw aken in the morning or a belief that others
would be better off if the individual were dead , to transient but recurrent thoughts of com-
mitting suicide, to a specific suicide plan. Mo re severely suicidal individuals may have put
their affairs in order (e.g., up dated wills, settled debts), acqu ired needed materials (e.g., a
rope or a gun), and chosen a location and time  to accomplish the suicide. Motivations for
suicide may include a desire to give up in th e face of perceived insurmountable obstacles,
an intense wish to end what is perceived as an unending and excruciatingly painful emo-
tional state, an inability to fo resee any enjoyment in life, or the wish to not be a burden to
others. The resolution of such thinking may be a more meaningful measure of diminished
suicide risk than denial of further plans for suicide.
The evaluation of the symptoms of a major depressive episode is especially difficult
when they occur in an indivi dual who also has a general me dical condition (e.g., cancer,
stroke, myocardial infarction, diabetes, pregna ncy). Some of the criterion signs and symp-
toms of a major depressive episode are iden tical to those of general medical conditions
(e.g., weight loss with untreated diabetes; fatigue with cancer; hypersomnia early in preg-
nancy; insomnia later in pregnancy or the postpartum). Such symp toms count toward a
major depressive diagnosis except when they are clearly and fully attributable to a general
medical condition. Nonv egetative symptoms of dysphoria,  anhedonia, guilt or worthless-
ness, impaired concentration or indecision, an d suicidal thoughts should be assessed with
particular care in such cases. Definitions of  major depressive episodes that have been mod-
ified to include only these nonvegetative sympto ms appear to identify nearly the same in-
dividuals as do the full criteria.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
Major depressive disorder is a ssociated with high mortality,  much of which is accounted
for by suicide; however, it is not the only cause. For example, depressed individuals ad-
mitted to nursing homes have a markedly increased likelihood of death in the first year. In-
dividuals frequently present with tearfulness,  irritability, brooding , obsessive rumination,
anxiety, phobias, excessive worry over physical he alth, and complaints of pain (e.g., head-
aches; joint, abdominal, or other pains). In children, separation anxiety may occur. 
Major Depressive Disorder 165
Although an extensive literature exists de scribing neuroanatomi cal, neuroendocrino-
logical, and neurophysiological correlates of major depressive disord er, no laboratory test
has yielded results of sufficient sensitivity and specificity to be used as a diagnostic tool for
this disorder. Until recently, hypothalamic-pit uitary-adrenal axis hyperactivity had been
the most extensively investigated abnormalit y associated with major depressive episodes,
and it appears to be associated with melancho lia, psychotic features, and risks for eventual
suicide. Molecular studies have also implicated peripheral factors, including genetic vari-
ants in neurotrophic factors and pro-inflammatory cytokines. A dditionally, functional
magnetic resonance imaging stud ies provide evidence  for functional ab normalities in spe-
cific neural systems supporting emotion processing, reward seeking, and emotion regula-
tion in adults with major depression. 
Prevalence
Twelve-month prevalence of major depressive disorder in the United States is approximately
7%, with marked differences by age group such th at the prevalence in 18- to 29-year-old indi-
viduals is threefold higher than the prevalence in individuals age 60 years or older. Females ex-
perience 1.5- to 3-fold higher rates th an males beginning in early adolescence.
Development and Course
Major depressive disorder may first appear at any age, but the likelihood of onset in-
creases markedly with puberty. In the United States, incidence appears to peak in the 20s;
however, first onset in la te life is not uncommon. 
The course of major depressive  disorder is quite variable, such that some individuals
rarely, if ever, experience re mission (a period of 2 or more  months with no symptoms, or
only one or two symptoms to no more than a mild degree), while others experience many
years with few or no symptoms  between discrete episodes. It  is important to distinguish
individuals who present for treatment during an exacerbation of a chronic depressive ill-
ness from those whose symptoms developed recently. Chronicity of depressive symptoms
substantially increases the likelihood of underlying personality, anxiety, and substance
use disorders and decreases the likelihood that  treatment will be followed by full symp-
tom resolution. It is therefore useful to ask individuals presenting with depressive symp-
toms to identify the last period  of at least 2 months during wh ich they were entirely free of
depressive symptoms. 
Recovery typically begins within 3 months of onset for two in five individuals with ma-
jor depression and within 1 year for four in five individuals. Recency of onset is a strong
determinant of the likelihood of near-term recovery, and many individuals who have been
depressed only for several months can be expe cted to recover sponta neously. Features as-
sociated with lower recovery rates, other th an current episode duration, include psychotic
features, prominent anxiety, persona lity disorders, and symptom severity.
The risk of recurrence become s progessively lower over time as the duration of re-
mission increases. The risk is higher in in dividuals whose preceding episode was severe,
in younger individuals, and in individuals who have already experienced multiple epi-
sodes. The persistence of even  mild depressive symptoms du ring remission is a powerful
predictor of recurrence.
Many bipolar illnesses begin with one or mo re depressive episodes, and a substantial
proportion of individuals who initially appear to have ma jor depressive disorder will
prove, in time, to instead have a bipolar disorder. This is more likely in individuals with
onset of the illness in adolescence, those with psychotic features, and those with a family
history of bipolar illness. The presence of a “with mixed feat ures” specifier also increases
the risk for future manic or hypomanic diagnosis. Major depr essive disorder, particularly
with psychotic features, may al so transition into schizophre nia, a change that is much
more frequent than the reverse. 
166 Depressive Disorders
Despite consistent differences between gender s in prevalence rates for depressive disor-
ders, there appear to be no clear differences by gender in phenomenology, course, or treat-
ment response. Similarly, there are no clear effe cts of current age on the course or treatment
response of major depressive disorder. Some symptom differe nces exist, though, such that
hypersomnia and hyperphagia ar e more likely in younger individuals, and melancholic
symptoms, particularly psychomotor disturbances, are more common in older individuals.
The likelihood of suicide attempts lessens in mi ddle and late life, although the risk of com-
pleted suicide does not. Depressions with ea rlier ages at onset are more familial and more
likely to involve personality disturbances. The course of major depressive disorder within
individuals does not generally change with aging. Mean times to recovery appear to be sta-
ble over long periods, and the likelihood of be ing in an episode does not generally increase
or decrease with time. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Neuroticism (negative affectivity) is a well-established risk factor for the
onset of major depressive disorder, and high le vels appear to render individuals more likely
to develop depressive episodes in re sponse to stressful life events.
Environmental. Adverse childhood experiences, part icularly when there are multiple
experiences of diverse types, constitute a set of  potent risk factors for major depressive dis-
order. Stressful life events are well recognized  as precipitants of major depressive epi-
sodes, but the presence or absence of adverse life events near the onset of episodes does
not appear to provide a useful guide to prognosis or treatment selection.
Genetic and physiological. First-degree family members of individuals with major de-
pressive disorder have a risk for major depres sive disorder two- to  fourfold higher than
that of the general population. Relative risks appear to be higher for early-onset and re-
current forms. Heritability is a pproximately 40%, and the personality trait neuroticism ac-
counts for a substantial port ion of this genetic liability.
Course modifiers. Essentially all major nonm ood disorders increase the risk of an indi-
vidual developing depression. Major depressive episodes th at develop against the back-
ground of another disorder of ten follow a more refractory course. Substance use, anxiety,
and borderline personality diso rders are among the most common of these, and the pre-
senting depressive symptoms may obscure an d delay their recognition. However, sus-
tained clinical improvement in depressive  symptoms may depend on the appropriate
treatment of underlying illnesses. Chronic or  disabling medical conditions also increase
risks for major depressive episod es. Such prevalent illnesses as diabetes, morbid obesity,
and cardiovascular disease are often complicated by depressive episodes, and these epi-
sodes are more likely to become chronic than are depressive episodes in medically healthy
individuals.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Surveys of major depressive disorder across diverse cultures have shown sevenfold dif-
ferences in 12-month prevalen ce rates but much more consistency in female-to-male ratio,
mean ages at onset, and the degree to which presence of the disorder raises the likelihood
of comorbid substance abuse. While these findings suggest substantial cultural differences
in the expression of major depressive disord er, they do not permit simple linkages be-
tween particular cultures and the likelihoo d of specific symptoms. Rather, clinicians
should be aware that in most  countries the majority of cases of depression go unrecog-
nized in primary care settings and that in ma ny cultures, somatic sy mptoms are very likely
to constitute the presenting  complaint. Among the Criterion A symptoms, insomnia and
loss of energy are the most uniformly reported.
Major Depressive Disorder 167
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Although the most reproducible finding in th e epidemiology of major depressive disorder
has been a higher prevalence in females, th ere are no clear differences between genders in
symptoms, course, treatment response, or functional consequences. In women, the risk for
suicide attempts is higher, and the risk for suicide completion is lower. The disparity in
suicide rate by gender is not as great among th ose with depressive disorders as it is in the
population as a whole. 
Suicide Risk
The possibility of suicidal behavior exists at  all times during major depressive episodes.
The most consistently described risk factor is a past history of suicide attempts or threats,
but it should be remembered that most comp leted suicides are not preceded by unsuccess-
ful attempts. Other features associated with  an increased risk for completed suicide
include male sex, being single or living alone,  and having prominent feelings of hopeless-
ness. The presence of borderline personality disorder markedly increases risk for future
suicide attempts. 
Functional Consequences of 
Major Depressive Disorder
Many of the functional consequences of major depressive disorder derive from individual
symptoms. Impairment can be very mild, such th at many of those who interact with the af-
fected individual are unaware of depressive symptoms. Impairment may, however, range
to complete incapacity such that the depressed individual is unable to attend to basic self-
care needs or is mute or catatonic. Among individuals seen in ge neral medical settings,
those with major depressive disorder have more pain and physical illness and greater de-
creases in physical, social, and role functioning.
Differential Diagnosis
Manic episodes with irritable mood or mixed episodes. Major depressive episodes
with prominent irritable mood may be difficu lt to distinguish from manic episodes with
irritable mood or from mixed episodes. This di stinction requires a careful clinical evalua-
tion of the presence of manic symptoms.
Mood disorder due to another medical condition. A major depressive episode is the
appropriate diagnosis if the mood  disturbance is not judged, based on individual history,
physical examination, and laboratory findings, to be the direct pathophysiological conse-
quence of a specific medical condition (e.g.,  multiple sclerosis, st roke, hypothyroidism).
Substance/medication-induced de pressive or bipolar disorder. This disorder is distin-
guished from major depressive disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication, a toxin) appears to be etiologically related to the mood disturbance. For ex-
ample, depressed mood that occurs only in the context of withdrawal from cocaine would
be diagnosed as cocaine-induced depressive disorder. 
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Distractibility and low frustration tolerance
can occur in both attention-deficit/ hypera ctivity disorder and a major depressive epi-
sode; if the criteria are met for both, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder may be diag-
nosed in addition to the mood  disorder. However, the clinic ian must be cautious not to
overdiagnose a major depressive episode in ch ildren with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder whose disturbance in mood is characte rized by irritability rather than by sadness
or loss of interest.
168 Depressive Disorders
Adjustment disorder with depressed mood. A major depressive episode that occurs in
response to a psychosocial stressor is distin guished from adjustment  disorder with de-
pressed mood by the fact that the full criteria  for a major depressive episode are not met in
adjustment disorder.
Sadness. Finally, periods of sadness are inhere nt aspects of the human experience.
These periods should not be diagnosed as a major depressive episod e unless criteria are
met for severity (i.e., five out of nine symptoms), duration (i.e., most of the day, nearly ev-
ery day for at least 2 weeks), and clinically significant distress or impairment. The diagno-
sis other specified depressive disorder may be appropriate for presentations of depressed
mood with clinically significant impairment that do not meet criteria  for duration or se-
verity.
Comorbidity
Other disorders with which majo r depressive disorder frequently co-occurs are substance-
related disorders, panic diso rder, obsessive-compulsive diso rder, anorexia nervosa, buli-
mia nervosa, and borderlin e personality disorder.
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia)
Diagnostic Criteria 300.4 (F34.1)
This disorder represents a consolidation of  DSM-IV-defined chronic major depressive dis-
order and dysthymic disorder.
A. Depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, as indicated by either
subjective account or observation by others, for at least 2 years.
Note:  In children and adolescents, mood can be irritable and duration must be at least
1 year.
B. Presence, while depressed, of two (or more) of the following:
1. Poor appetite or overeating.
2. Insomnia or hypersomnia.
3. Low energy or fatigue.
4. Low self-esteem.
5. Poor concentration or difficulty making decisions.
6. Feelings of hopelessness.
C. During the 2-year period (1 year for children or adolescents) of the disturbance, the individ-
ual has never been without the symptoms in Criteria A and B for more than 2 months at a
time.
D. Criteria for a major depressive disorder may be continuously present for 2 years. 
E. There has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode, and criteria have
never been met for cyclothymic disorder.
F. The disturbance is not better explained by a persistent schizoaffective disorder,
schizophrenia, delusional disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia
spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
G. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition (e.g. hypothyroidism).
H. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other important areas of functioning.
Note:  Because the criteria for a major depressive episode include four symptoms that are
absent from the symptom list for persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), a very limited
Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia) 169
number of individuals will have depressive symptoms that have persisted longer than 2 years
but will not meet criteria for persistent depressive disorder. If full criteria for a major de-
pressive episode have been met at some point during the current episode of illness, they
should be given a diagnosis of major depressive disorder. Otherwise, a diagnosis of other
specified depressive disorder or unspecified depressive disorder is warranted. 
Specify if:
With anxious distress (p. 184)
With mixed features (pp. 184–185)
With melancholic features (p. 185)
With atypical features  (pp. 185–186)
With mood-congruent psychotic features (p. 186)
With mood-incongruent psychotic features  (p. 186)
With peripartum onset  (pp. 186–187)
Specify if:
In partial remission  (p. 188)
In full remission  (p. 188)
Specify if:
Early onset:  If onset is before age 21 years.
Late onset:  If onset is at age 21 years or older.
Specify if (for most recent 2 years of persistent depressive disorder):
With pure dysthymic syndrome:  Full criteria for a major depressive episode have not
been met in at least the preceding 2 years.
With persistent major depressive episode:  Full criteria for a major depressive epi-
sode have been met throughout the preceding 2-year period.
With intermittent major depressi ve episodes, with current episode: Full criteria for
a major depressive episode are currently met, but there have been periods of at least
8 weeks in at least the preceding 2 years with symptoms below the threshold for a full
major depressive episode.
With intermittent major depressive episodes, without current episode: Full crite-
ria for a major depressive episode are not currently met, but there has been one or
more major depressive episodes in at least the preceding 2 years.
Specify current severity:
Mild (p. 188)
Moderate  (p. 188)
Severe (p. 188)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) is a depressed mood
that occurs for most of the day, for more days th an not, for at least 2 ye ars, or at least 1 year
for children and adolescents (Criterion A). Th is disorder represents a consolidation of
DSM-IV-defined chronic major depressive di sorder and dysthymic disorder. Major de-
pression may precede persistent depressive disorder, and major de pressive episodes may
occur during persistent depressive disorder. Individuals whose symptoms meet major de-
pressive disorder criter ia for 2 years should be given a diagnosis of persistent depressive
disorder as well as majo r depressive disorder.
Individuals with persistent depressive diso rder describe their mood as sad or “down
in the dumps.” During periods of depressed mood, at least two of the six symptoms from
Criterion B are present. Because these sympto ms have become a part of the individual’s
day-to-day experience, particular ly in the case of early onse t (e.g., “I’ve always been this
170 Depressive Disorders
way”), they may not be reported unless the indi vidual is directly prom pted. During the 2-year
period (1 year for children or adolescents), any symptom-free intervals last no longer than
2 months (Criterion C). 
Prevalence
Persistent depressive disorder is effectively an amalgam of DSM-IV dysthymic disorder and
chronic major depressive episode. The 12-month prevalence in the United States is approxi-
mately 0.5% for persistent depre ssive disorder and 1.5% for chro nic major depressive disorder.
Development and Course
Persistent depressive disorder often has an early and insidious onset (i.e., in childhood,
adolescence, or early adult life) and, by de finition, a chronic course. Among individuals
with both persistent depressiv e disorder and borderline pers onality disorder, the covari-
ance of the corresponding features over ti me suggests the operatio n of a common mecha-
nism. Early onset (i.e., before age 21 years)  is associated with a higher likelihood of
comorbid personality disorder s and substance use disorders.
When symptoms rise to the level of a major depressive episode, they are likely to sub-
sequently revert to a lower level. However,  depressive symptoms are much less likely to
resolve in a given period of time in the context of persistent depressive disorder than they
are in a major depressive episode.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Factors predictive of poorer long -term outcome include higher levels
of neuroticism (negative affect ivity), greater symptom severity, poorer global functioning,
and presence of anxiety disorders or conduct disorder.
Environmental. Childhood risk factors include parental loss or separation.
Genetic and physiological. There are no clear differences in  illness development, course,
or family history between DSM-IV dysthymi c disorder and chronic major depressive dis-
order. Earlier findings pertaining to either disorder are therefore likely to apply to per-
sistent depressive disorder. It is thus likel y that individuals with persistent depressive
disorder will have a higher pr oportion of first-degree relatives with persistent depressive
disorder than do individuals with major de pressive disorder, and more depressive disor-
ders in general.
A number of brain regions (e.g., prefrontal  cortex, anterior cing ulate, amygdala, hip-
pocampus) have been implicated in persiste nt depressive disorder. Possible polysomno-
graphic abnormalities exist as well.
Functional Consequences of 
Persistent Depressive Disorder
The degree to which persistent depressive diso rder impacts social and occupational func-
tioning is likely to vary widely, but effects can be as great as or greater than those of major
depressive disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive disorder. If there is a depressed mood plus two or more symptoms
meeting criteria for a persistent depressive ep isode for 2 years or more, then the diagnosis of
persistent depressive disorder is made. Th e diagnosis depends on the 2-year duration,
which distinguishes it from episodes of depressi on that do not last 2 years. If the symptom
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder 171
criteria are sufficient for a diagnosis of a major depressive episode at any time during this pe-
riod, then the diagnosis of major depression shou ld be noted, but it is coded not as a separate
diagnosis but rather as a specifie r with the diagnosis of  persistent depressive disorder. If the
individual’s symptoms currently meet full crit eria for a major depressive episode, then the
specifier of “with intermittent major depressi ve episodes, with current episode” would be
made. If the major depressive episode has pers isted for at least a 2-year duration and re-
mains present, then the specifie r “with persistent major depressive episode” is used. When
full major depressive episode cr iteria are not currently met but there has been at least one
previous episode of major depression in the cont ext of at least 2 years of persistent depres-
sive symptoms, then the specifier of “with in termittent major depres sive episodes, without
current episode” is used. If the individual ha s not experienced an episode of major depres-
sion in the last 2 years, then the specifier “with pure dysthymic syndrome” is used.
Psychotic disorders. Depressive symptoms are a common  associated feature of chronic
psychotic disorders (e.g., schi zoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional disorder). A
separate diagnosis of persistent depressive disorder is not made if the symptoms occur
only during the course of the psychoti c disorder (including residual phases).
Depressive or bipolar and related diso rder due to another medical condition. Persistent
depressive disorder must be distinguished from a depressive or bipolar and related dis-
order due to another medical co ndition. The diagnosis is depressive or bipolar and related
disorder due to another medical condition if the mood disturbance is judged, based on his-
tory, physical examination, or laboratory findin gs, to be attributable to the direct patho-
physiological effects of a specific, usually  chronic, medical condition (e.g., multiple
sclerosis). If it is judged that the depressive  symptoms are not attrib utable to the physiolog-
ical effects of another medical condition, then the primary ment al disorder (e.g., persistent
depressive disorder) is recorded, and the medi cal condition is noted as a concomitant med-
ical condition (e.g., diabetes mellitus).
Substance/medication-induced depressive or bipolar disorder. A substance/medi-
cation-induced depressive or bipolar and rela ted disorder is distin guished from persis-
tent depressive disorder when a substance (e.g ., a drug of abuse, a medication, a toxin) is
judged to be etiologically re lated to the mood disturbance.
Personality disorders. Often, there is evidence of a co existing personality disturbance.
When an individual’s presentation meets the cr iteria for both persis tent depressive disor-
der and a personality disorder , both diagnoses are given.
Comorbidity 
In comparison to individuals with major depressive disorder, those with persistent de-
pressive disorder are at higher risk for psychiatric comorbidit y in general, and for anxiety
disorders and substance use disorders in partic ular. Early-onset persistent depressive dis-
order is strongly associated with DSM-IV  Cluster B and C personality disorders.
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 625.4 (N94.3)
A. In the majority of menstrual cycles, at least five symptoms must be present in the final
week before the onset of menses, start to improve  within a few days after the onset of
menses, and become minimal  or absent in the week postmenses.
B. One (or more) of the following symptoms must be present:
1. Marked affective lability (e.g., mood swings; feeling suddenly sad or tearful, or in-
creased sensitivity to rejection).
172 Depressive Disorders
2. Marked irritability or anger or increased interpersonal conflicts.
3. Marked depressed mood, feelings of hopelessness, or self-deprecating thoughts.
4. Marked anxiety, tension, and/or feelings of being keyed up or on edge.
C. One (or more) of the following symptoms must additionally be present, to reach a total
of five  symptoms when combined with sym ptoms from Criterion B above.
1. Decreased interest in usual activities (e.g., work, school, friends, hobbies).
2. Subjective difficulty in concentration.
3. Lethargy, easy fatigability, or marked lack of energy.
4. Marked change in appetite; overeating; or specific food cravings.
5. Hypersomnia or insomnia.
6. A sense of being overwhelmed or out of control.
7. Physical symptoms such as breast tenderness or swelling, joint or muscle pain, a
sensation of “bloating,” or weight gain.
Note:  The symptoms in Criteria A–C must have been met for most menstrual cycles that
occurred in the preceding year.
D. The symptoms are associated with clinically significant distress or interference with
work, school, usual social activities, or relationships with others (e.g., avoidance of so-
cial activities; decreased productivity and efficiency at work, school, or home).
E. The disturbance is not merely an exacerbation of the symptoms of another disorder,
such as major depressive disorder, panic disorder, persistent depressive disorder
(dysthymia), or a personality disorder (a lthough it may co-occur with any of these dis-
orders).
F. Criterion A should be confirmed by prospect ive daily ratings during at least two symptom-
atic cycles. ( Note:  The diagnosis may be made provisionally prior to this confirmation.)
G. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication, other treatment ) or another medical condition (e.g., hy-
perthyroidism).
Recording Procedures
If symptoms have not been confirmed by prospective daily ratings of at least two symp-
tomatic cycles, “provisional” should be noted after the name of the diagnosis (i.e., “pre-
menstrual dysphoric disorder, provisional”).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of premenstrual dyspho ric disorder are the expression of mood la-
bility, irritability, dysphoria, and anxiety symptoms that occur repeatedly during the pre-
menstrual phase of the cycle and remit around the onset of me nses or shortl y thereafter.
These symptoms may be accompanied by behavioral and physical symptoms. Symptoms
must have occurred in most of the menstrual cycles during the past year and must have an
adverse effect on work or social functioning.  The intensity and/or expressivity of the ac-
companying symptoms may be closely related to social and cultural background charac-
teristics of the affected female, family pers pectives, and more specific factors such as
religious beliefs, social tolerance,  and female gender role issues.
Typically, symptoms peak around the time of  the onset of menses. Although it is not
uncommon for symptoms to linger into the first few days of menses, the individual must
have a symptom-free period in the follicular  phase after the menstrual period begins.
While the core symptoms include mood and anxiety symptoms, behavioral and somatic
symptoms commonly also occur. However, the presence of physic al and/or behavioral
symptoms in the absence of mood and/or anxious symptoms is not sufficient for a diag-
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder 173
nosis. Symptoms are of comparab le severity (but not duration) to those of another mental
disorder, such as a major depressive episode or generalized anxiety disorder. In order to
confirm a provisional diagnosis, daily pros pective symptom ratings are required for at
least two symptomatic cycles.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Delusions and hallucinations have been described in the late luteal phase of the menstrual
cycle but are rare. The premenstrual phase has b een considered by some to be a risk period
for suicide. 
Prevalence
Twelve-month prevalence of premenstrual dy sphoric disorder is between 1.8% and 5.8%
of menstruating women. Estimates are substant ially inflated if they are based on retro-
spective reports rather than prospective da ily ratings. However,  estimated prevalence
based on a daily record of symptoms for 1–2 months may be less representative, as indi-
viduals with the most severe symptoms may be  unable to sustain the rating process. The
most rigorous estimate of premenstrual dy sphoric disorder is 1.8% for women whose
symptoms meet the full criteria without fu nctional impairment and 1.3% for women
whose symptoms meet the current criteria wi th functional impairment and without co-oc-
curring symptoms from another mental disorder. 
Development and Course
Onset of premenstrual dysphoric disorder ca n occur at any point after menarche. Inci-
dence of new cases over a 40-month follow-up period is 2.5% (95% confidence interval =
1.7–3.7). Anecdotally, many individuals, as th ey approach menopause, report that symp-
toms worsen. Symptoms cease after menopaus e, although cyclical hormone replacement
can trigger the re-expression of symptoms.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Environmental factors associated with the expression of premenstrual
dysphoric disorder include stress, history of  interpersonal trauma, seasonal changes, and
sociocultural aspects of female sexual behavior  in general, and female gender role in par-
ticular. 
Genetic and physiological. Heritability of prem enstrual dysphoric disorder is unknown.
However, for premenstrual sy mptoms, estimates for heritability range between 30% and
80%, with the most stable component of premenstrual symptoms es timated to be about
50% heritable. 
Course modifiers. Women who use oral contraceptiv es may have fewer premenstrual
complaints than do women who do not use oral contraceptives. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Premenstrual dysphoric disord er is not a culture-bound syndrome and has been observed
in individuals in the United States, Europe, India, and Asia. It is unclear as to whether rates
differ by race. Nevertheless, fr equency, intensity, and expres sivity of symptoms and help-
seeking patterns may be significantl y influenced by cultural factors. 
Diagnostic Markers
As indicated earlier, the diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder is appropriately
confirmed by 2 months of pros pective symptom ratings. A number of scales, including the
174 Depressive Disorders
Daily Rating of Severity of Problems and the Visual Analogue Sc ales for Premenstrual
Mood Symptoms, have undergone validation and are commonly used in clinical trials for
premenstrual dysphoric disorder. The Premenst rual Tension Syndrome Rating Scale has a
self-report and an observer vers ion, both of which have been validated and used widely to
measure illness severity in women who ha ve premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
Functional Consequences of 
Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
Symptoms must be associated with clinically  meaningful distress and/or an obvious and
marked impairment in the ability to function so cially or occupationally in the week prior
to menses. Impairment in social functionin g may be manifested by marital discord and
problems with children, other family members,  or friends. Chronic marital or job prob-
lems should not be confused with dysfunction that occurs only in association with pre-
menstrual dysphoric disorder. 
Differential Diagnosis
Premenstrual syndrome. Premenstrual syndrome differs from premenstrual dysphoric
disorder in that a minimum of five symptoms is not required, and there is no stipulation of
affective symptoms for individuals who have premenstrual syndrome. This condition
may be more common than premenstrual dy sphoric disorder, although the estimated
prevalence of premenstrual syndrome varies. While premen strual syndrome shares the
feature of symptom expression during the premenstrual phase of the menstrual cycle, it is
generally considered to be less severe than  premenstrual dysphoric disorder. The pres-
ence of physical or  behavioral symptoms in the pr emenstruum, without the required
affective symptoms, likely meet s criteria for prem enstrual syndrome and not for premen-
strual dysphoric disorder.
Dysmenorrhea. Dysmenorrhea is a syndrome of painful menses, but this is distinct from a
syndrome characterized by affective changes.  Moreover, symptoms of dysmenorrhea begin
with the onset of menses, whereas symptoms of  premenstrual dysphoric disorder, by defini-
tion, begin before the onset of menses, even if they linger into the first few days of menses. 
Bipolar disorder, major depressive disord er, and persistent depressive disorder
(dysthymia). Many women with (either naturally occurring or substance/medication-
induced) bipolar or major depressive disorder  or persistent depressive disorder believe
that they have premenstrual dysphoric disorder. However, when they chart symptoms,
they realize that the symptoms do not follo w a premenstrual pattern. Women with an-
other mental disorder may experience chronic symptoms or interm ittent symptoms that
are unrelated to menstrual cycle phase. Howeve r, because the onset of menses constitutes
a memorable event, they may report that symptoms occur only during the premenstruum
or that symptoms worsen premenstrually. This  is one of the rationales for the requirement
that symptoms be confirmed by daily prospect ive ratings. The process of differential di-
agnosis, particularly if the clinician relies on retrospective symptoms only, is made more
difficult because of the overlap between sy mptoms of premenstrual dysphoric disorder
and some other diagnoses. The overlap of symp toms is particularly salient for differenti-
ating premenstrual dysphoric disorder from major depressive episodes, persistent de-
pressive disorder, bipolar disorders, and bo rderline personality di sorder. However, the
rate of personality disorders is no higher in individuals with premenstrual dysphoric dis-
order than in those without the disorder.
Use of hormonal treatments. Some women who present with moderate to severe pre-
menstrual symptoms may be using hormonal treatments, including hormonal contracep-
tives. If such symptoms occur after initia tion of exogenous hormone use, the symptoms
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder 175
may be due to the use of hormones rather th an to the underlying condition of premen-
strual dysphoric disorder. If the woman stops hormones and the symptoms disappear,
this is consistent with substance/medi cation-induced depressive disorder.
Comorbidity
A major depressive episode is the most frequent ly reported previous disorder in individuals
presenting with premenstrual dysphoric disorder. A wide range of medical (e.g., migraine,
asthma, allergies, seizure disorders) or other mental disorders (e.g., depressive and bipolar
disorders, anxiety disorders, bulimia nervosa, substance use disorders) may worsen in the
premenstrual phase; however, the absence of  a symptom-free period during the postmen-
strual interval obviates a diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. These conditions
are better considered premenstrual  exacerbation of a current mental or medical disorder. Al-
though the diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder should not be assigned in situa-
tions in which an individual only experien ces a premenstrual exacerbation of another
mental or physical disorder, it can be considered in addition to the diagnosis of another men-
tal or physical disorder if the individual experiences symptoms and changes in level of func-
tioning that are characteristic of premenstrual dysphoric disorder and markedly different
from the symptoms experienced as part of the ongoing disorder. 
Substance/Medication-Induced
Depressive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. A prominent and persistent disturbance in mood that predominates in the clinical pic-
ture and is characterized by depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or plea-
sure in all, or almost all, activities.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both
(1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication
or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Crite-
rion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a depressive disorder that is not substance/
medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent depressive disorder could in-
clude the following:
The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms
persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of acute
withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence suggesting the existence
of an independent non-substance/medication-i nduced depressive disorder (e.g., a his-
tory of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium. 
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Note:  This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical
picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medica-
tion]-induced depressive disorders are indicate d in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-
176 Depressive Disorders
CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for
the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-
induced depressive disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should record
“mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced depressive disorder (e.g.,
“mild cocaine use di sorder with cocain e-induced depressive disorder”). If a moderate or se-
vere substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced depressive disorder,
the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moderate [substance] use
disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid
substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-
time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the clinician should
record only the substance-induced depressive disorder.
Specify if (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for di-
agnoses associated with substance class):
With onset during intoxication:  If criteria are met for intoxication with the substance
and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal:  If criteria are met for withdrawal from the substance
and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
Recording Procedures
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication -induced depressive disorder begins
with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, de xamethasone) that is presumed to be causing
the depressive symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the
criteria set, which is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit into any of the
classes (e.g., dexamethasone), th e code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases
in which a substance is judged to be an etiologi cal factor but the specific class of substance
is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
The name of the disorder is followed by the sp ecification of onset (i.e., onset during in-
toxication, onset during with drawal). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM,
which combine the substance-induced disorder and substance use disorder into a singleICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CMWith use 
disorder, 
mildWith use 
disorder, 
moderate 
or severeWithout 
use 
disorder
Alcohol 291.89 F10.14 F10.24 F10.94
Phencyclidine 292.84 F16.14 F16.24 F16.94
Other hallucinogen 292.84 F16.14 F16.24 F16.94
Inhalant 292.84 F18.14 F18.24 F18.94
Opioid 292.84 F11.14 F11.24 F11.94
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic 292.84 F13.14 F13.24 F13.94
Amphetamine (or other 
stimulant)292.84 F15.14 F15.24 F15.94
Cocaine 292.84 F14.14 F14.24 F14.94
Other (or unknown) substance 292.84 F19.14 F19.24 F19.94
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder 177
code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code  is given for the substance use disorder. For
example, in the case of depressive symptoms  occurring during withdrawal in a man with
a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is 292.84 cocaine-induced depressive disorder,
with onset during with drawal. An additional diagnosis of 304.20 severe cocaine use dis-
order is also given. When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in
the development of depressive mood symptoms , each should be listed separately (e.g.,
292.84 methylphenidate-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal;
292.84 dexamethasone-induced depressive diso rder, with onset during intoxication).
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/medication -induced depressive disorder begins
with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, de xamethasone) that is presumed to be causing
the depressive symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the
criteria set, which is based on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid sub-
stance use disorder. For substances that do no t fit into any of the cl asses (e.g., dexameth-
asone), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is
judged to be an etiological factor but the spec ific class of substance is unknown, the category
“unknown substance” should be used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” follo wed by the name of the substance-induced de-
pressive disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onset
during withdrawal). For example,  in the case of depressive sy mptoms occurring during with-
drawal in a man with a severe cocaine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.24 severe cocaine use
disorder with cocaine-induced depressive disorder, with onset during withdrawal. A separate
diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced
depressive disorder occurs without a comorbid  substance use disorder  (e.g., after a one-time
heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F16.94
phencyclidine-induced depr essive disorder, with onset during intoxication). When more than
one substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of depressive mood
symptoms, each should be listed separately (e .g., F15.24 severe methylphenidate use disorder
with methylphenidate-induced depressive diso rder, with onset during withdrawal; F19.94
dexamethasone-induced depressive disord er, with onset during intoxication).
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic features of substance/medication-induced depressive disorder include the
symptoms of a depressive disorder, such as major depressive disorder; however, the de-
pressive symptoms are associated with the ingestion, injection, or inhalation of a sub-
stance (e.g., drug of abuse,  toxin, psychotropic medicati on, other medication), and the
depressive symptoms persist be yond the expected length of physiological effects, intoxi-
cation, or withdrawal period. As evidenced by  clinical history, phy sical examination, or
laboratory findings, th e relevant depressive disorder should have developed during or
within 1 month after use of a substance that is capable of producing the depressive disor-
der (Criterion B1). In additi on, the diagnosis is not better  explained by an independent
depressive disorder. Evidence of an indepe ndent depressive disorder includes the de-
pressive disorder preceded the onset of inge stion or withdrawal from the substance; the
depressive disorder persists beyo nd a substantial period of ti me after the cessation of sub-
stance use; or other evidence suggests th e existence of an independent non-substance/
medication-induced depressive disorder (Criterion C). This diagnosis should not be made
when symptoms occur exclusivel y during the course of a delirium (Criterion D). The de-
pressive disorder associated with the substance use, intoxication, or withdrawal must
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa tional, or other impor-
tant areas of functioning to qualify for this diagnosis (Criterion E).
Some medications (e.g., stimulants, steroids, L-dopa, antibiotics, central nervous
system drugs, dermatological agents, chem otherapeutic drugs, immunological agents)
178 Depressive Disorders
can induce depressive mood di sturbances. Clinical judgment is essential to determine
whether the medication is truly associated with inducing the depressive disorder or
whether a primary depressive disorder happen ed to have its onset while the person was
receiving the treatment. For example, a depres sive episode that developed within the first
several weeks of beginning alpha-methyldopa (an antihypertensive agent) in an individ-
ual with no history of major depressive diso rder would qualify for the diagnosis of med-
ication-induced depressive diso rder. In some cases, a prev iously established condition
(e.g., major depressive disorder , recurrent) can recur while th e individual is coincidentally
taking a medication that has the capacity  to cause depressive symptoms (e.g., L-dopa, oral
contraceptives). In such cases, the clinicia n must make a judgment  as to whether the med-
ication is causative in this particular situation.
A substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is distinguished from a primary
depressive disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors associated with the
substance use. There must be evidence from the history, phy sical examination, or labora-
tory findings of substance use, abuse, intoxication, or withdrawal prior to the onset of the
depressive disorder. The withdrawal state for some substances can be relatively pro-
tracted, and thus intense depressive symptoms can last for a long period after the cessation
of substance use. 
Prevalence
In a nationally representative U.S. adult po pulation, the lifetime pr evalence of substance/
medication-induced depressive disorder is 0.26%.
Development and Course
A depressive disorder associated with the use of substance (i.e., alcoho l, illicit drugs, or a
prescribed treatment for a mental disorder or another medical condition) must have its on-
set while the individual is using the substanc e or during withdrawal, if there is a with-
drawal syndrome associated with the substanc e. Most often, the de pressive disorder has
its onset within the first few weeks or 1 month of use of the substance. Once the substance
is discontinued, the depressive symptoms usually  remit within days to several weeks, de-
pending on the half-life of the substance/medication and the presence of a withdrawal
syndrome. If symptoms persist 4 weeks beyond the expected time course of withdrawal of
a particular substance/medi cation, other causes for th e depressive mood symptoms
should be considered.
Although there are a few prospective controlle d trials examining the association of de-
pressive symptoms with use of a medication, most report s are from postmarketing sur-
veillance studies, retrospective observational studies, or case  reports, making evidence of
causality difficult to determine. Substances implicated in medication-induced depressive
disorder, with varying degrees of evidence, in clude antiviral agents (efavirenz), cardio-
vascular agents (clonidine, guanethidine, me thyldopa, reserpine), re tinoic acid deriva-
tives (isotretinoin), antidepressants, antico nvulsants, anti-migraine agents (triptans),
antipsychotics, hormonal agents (corticost eroids, oral contrace ptives, gonadotropin-
releasing hormone agonists, tamoxifen), smoking cessation agents (varenicline), and im-
munological agents (interferon) . However, other potential su bstances continue to emerge
as new compounds are synthesized. A history of  such substance use may help increase di-
agnostic certainty.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Factors that appear to increase the risk of substance/medication-
induced depressive disorder can be conceptualized as pertaining to the specific type of
drug or to a group of individuals with underlying alcohol or drug use disorders. Risk fac-
Substance/Medication-Induced Depressive Disorder 179
tors common to all drugs incl ude history of major depressive disorder, history of drug-
induced depression, and psychosocial stressors.
Environmental.  There are also risks factors pertaini ng to a specific type of medication
(e.g., increased immune activation prior to treatment for hepatitis C associated with inter-
feron-alfa-induced depression); high doses (greater than 80 mg/day prednisone-equiva-
lents) of corticosteroids or high plasma conc entrations of efavirenz; and high estrogen/
progesterone content in  oral contraceptives.
Course modifiers. In a representative U.S. adult popu lation, compared with individuals
with major depressive disorder who did not have a substance use disorder, individuals
with substance-induced depressive disorder were more likely to be male, to be black, to
have at most a high school diploma, to lack  insurance, and to have  lower family income.
They were also more likely to report higher  family history of substance use disorders and
antisocial behavior, higher 12-month history of stressful life events, and a greater number
of DSM-IV major depressive diso rder criteria. They were more  likely to report feelings of
worthlessness, insomnia/hypersomnia, and thoughts of deat h and suicide attempts, but
less likely to report depressed mood and parental loss by death before age 18 years.
Diagnostic Markers
Determination of the substance of use can so metimes be made through laboratory assays
of the suspected substance in the blood or urine to corroborate the diagnosis.
Suicide Risk
Drug-induced or treatment-emergent suicidality represents a marked change in thoughts
and behavior from the person’s baseline, is us ually temporally associated with initiation of
a substance, and must be distinguished from  the underlying prim ary mental disorders.
In regard to the treatment-emergent suicida lity associated with antidepressants, a U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) adviso ry committee considered meta-analyses of
99,839 participants enrolled in 372 randomized clin ical trials of antidepressants in trials for
mental disorders. The analyses  showed that when the data were pooled across all adult
age groups, there was no perceptible increased risk of suicidal behavior or ideation. How-
ever, in age-stratified analyses , the risk for patients ages 18–24 years was elevated, albeit
not significantly (odds ratio [OR] = 1.55; 95%  confidence interval [CI] = 0.91–2.70). The
FDA meta-analyses reveal an absolute risk of suicide in patients taking investigational an-
tidepressants of 0.01%. In conc lusion, suicide is clearly an extremely rare treatment-emer-
gent phenomenon, but the outcome of suicid e was serious enough to prompt the FDA to
issue an expanded black-box warning in 2007 regarding the importance of careful moni-
toring of treatment-emergent suicidal ideati on in patients receiving antidepressants.
Differential Diagnosis
Substance intoxication and withdrawal. Depressive symptoms occur commonly in sub-
stance intoxication and substance withdrawal, and the diagnosis of the substance-specific
intoxication or withdrawal will usually suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A
diagnosis of substance-induced depressive di sorder should be made  instead of a diag-
nosis of substance intoxicati on or substance withdrawal when the mood symptoms are
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention. For example, dysphoric
mood is a characteristic feature of coca ine withdrawal. Substance/medication-induced
depressive disorder should be diagnosed inst ead of cocaine withdrawal only if the mood
disturbance is substantially more intense or longer lasting than what is usually encountered
with cocaine withdrawal and is sufficiently seve re to be a separate focus of attention and
treatment.
180 Depressive Disorders
Primary depressive disorder. A substance/medication-induc ed depressive disorder is
distinguished from a primary de pressive disorder by the fact that a substance is judged to
be etiologically related to the symptoms, as  described earlier (see section “Development
and Course” for this disorder).
Depressive disorder due to another medical condition. Because individuals with other
medical conditions often take medications for th ose conditions, the clinician must consider the
possibility that the mood symptoms are caused by the physiological consequences of the med-
ical condition rather than the medication, in which case depres sive disorder due to another
medical condition is diagnosed. The history often provides the primary basis for such a judg-
ment. At times, a change in the treatment for the other medical condition (e.g., medication sub-
stitution or discontinuation) may be needed to determine empirically whether the medication
is the causative agent. If the clinician has ascertained that the disturbance is a function of both
another medical condition and su bstance use or withdrawal, both  diagnoses (i.e., depressive
disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medication-induced depressive
disorder) may be given. When there is insuffic ient evidence to determine whether the depres-
sive symptoms are associated with substance (including a medication) ingestion or with-
drawal or with another medical condition or are primary (i.e., not a function of either a
substance or another medical condition), a diagno sis of other specified depressive disorder or
unspecified depressive diso rder would be indicated.
Comorbidity
Compared with individuals with major depre ssive disorder and no comorbid substance
use disorder, those with substance/medicati on-induced depressive disorder have higher
rates of comorbidity with any DSM-IV mental disorder; are more likely to have specific
DSM-IV disorders of pathological gambling and paranoid, histrionic, and antisocial per-
sonality disorders; and are less likely to have  persistent depressive  disorder (dysthymia).
Compared with individuals with major depressive disorder and a comorbid substance use
disorder, individuals with substance/medication-induced depressive disorder are more
likely to have alcohol use disorder, any othe r substance use disorder, and histrionic per-
sonality disorder; however, they are less likely to have persistent depressive disorder.
Depressive Disorder
 Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A prominent and persistent period of depressed mood or markedly diminished interest
or pleasure in all, or almost all, activiti es that predominates in the clinical picture.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condi-
tion.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., adjustment
disorder, with depressed mood, in which the stressor is a serious medical condition).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code for depressive di sorder due to another medical condi-
tion is 293.83,  which is assigned regardless of the specifier. The ICD-10-CM code de-
pends on the specifier (see below).
Depressive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 181
Specify if: 
(F06.31) With depressive features: Full criteria are not met for a major depressive
episode.
(F06.32) With major depressive–like episode:  Full criteria are met (except Criterion
C) for a major depressive episode.
(F06.34) With mixed features: Symptoms of mania or hypomania are also present but
do not predominate in the clinical picture.
Coding note:  Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the mental dis-
order (e.g., 293.83 [F06.31] depressive disorder due to hypothyroidism, with depressive fea-
tures). The other medical condition should al so be coded and listed separately immediately
before the depressive disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 244.9 [E03.9] hypothyroid-
ism; 293.83 [F06.31] depressive disorder due to hypothyroidism, with depressive features).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of depressive disorder  due to another medical condition is a promi-
nent and persistent period of depressed mood or markedly diminished interest or plea-
sure in all, or almost all, ac tivities that predominates in th e clinical picture (Criterion A)
and that is thought to be related to the direct  physiological effects of another medical con-
dition (Criterion B). In determining whethe r the mood disturbance is due to a general
medical condition, the clinician must first establish the presence of a general medical con-
dition. Further, the clinician mu st establish that the mood di sturbance is etiologically re-
lated to the general medical condition through a physiological mechanism. A careful and
comprehensive assessment of multiple factor s is necessary to make this judgment. Al-
though there are no infallible guidelines  for determining whether the relationship
between the mood disturbance and the general medical condition is etiological, several
considerations provide some guidance in this area. One consideration is the presence of a
temporal association between th e onset, exacerbation, or remission of the general medical
condition and that of the mood disturbance. A second consideration is the presence of fea-
tures that are atypical of prim ary Mood Disorders (e.g., atypic al age at onset or course or
absence of family history). Evidence from the literature that suggests th at there can be a di-
rect association between the general medical condition in question and the development
of mood symptoms can provide a useful contex t in the assessment of a particular situation.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Etiology (i.e., a causal relationship to anothe r medical condition based on best clinical ev-
idence) is the key variable in depressive di sorder due to another medical condition. The
listing of the medical conditions that are said to be able to in duce major depression is never
complete, and the clinician’s best judg ment is the essence of this diagnosis.
There are clear associations, as well as some neuroanatomical correlates, of depression
with stroke, Huntington’s dise ase, Parkinson’s disease, and traumatic brain injury. Among
the neuroendocrine conditions most closely associated with  depression are Cushing’s dis-
ease and hypothyroidism. There are numerous other conditions thought to be associated
with depression, such as multiple sclerosis.  However, the literature’s support for a causal
association is greater with some conditions , such as Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s
disease, than with others, for which the differ ential diagnosis may be  adjustment disorder,
with depressed mood.
Development and Course
Following stroke, the onset of depression appear s to be very acute, occurring within 1 day
or a few days of the cerebrovascular accident (CVA) in the largest case series. However, in
182 Depressive Disorders
some cases, onset of the depression is weeks to months following the CVA. In the largest
series, the duration of the major depressive episode follo wing stroke was 9–11 months on
average. Similarly, in Huntington’s disease the depressive state comes quite early in the
course of the illness. With Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s disease, it often precedes
the major motor impairments and cognitive impairments associ ated with each condition.
This is more prominently the case for Huntin gton’s disease, in which depression is con-
sidered to be the first neuropsychiatric symptom. There is some observational evidence
that depression is less common as the dementia of Huntington’s disease progresses. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The risk of acute onset of a major depressive disorder following a CVA (within 1 day to a
week of the event) appears to be strongly correlated with lesion location, with greatest risk
associated with left frontal strokes and least risk apparently associated with right frontal
lesions in those individuals who present within days of the stroke. The association with
frontal regions and laterality is not observed in depressive states that occur in the 2–6 months
following stroke.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Gender differences pertain to those associat ed with the medical condition (e.g., systemic
lupus erythematosus is more common in fema les; stroke is somewhat more common in
middle-age males compared with females).
Diagnostic Markers
Diagnostic markers pertain to those associated with the medical condition (e.g., steroid
levels in blood or urine to help corroborate the diagnosis of Cushing’s disease, which can
be associated with manic or depressive syndromes).
Suicide Risk
There are no epidemiological stud ies that provide evidence to differentiate the risk of sui-
cide from a major depressive episode due to another medical conditio n compared with the
risk from a major depressive episode in general. There are case reports of suicides in
association with major depressive episodes  associated with another medical condition.
There is a clear association between serious medical illnesses and suicide, particularly
shortly after onset or diagnosis of the illness. Thus, it would be prudent to assume that the
risk of suicide for major depressive episodes associated with medical conditions is not less
than that for other forms of major depres sive episode, and might even be greater.
Functional Consequences of Depressive Disorder 
Due to Another Medical Condition
Functional consequences pertain to those asso ciated with the medical condition. In gen-
eral, it is believed, but not es tablished, that a major depres sive episode induced by Cush-
ing’s disease will not recur if the Cushing’s dise ase is cured or arrested. However, it is also
suggested, but not established, that mood syndromes, including depressive and manic/
hypomanic ones, may be episodic (i.e., recurring ) in some individuals with static brain in-
juries and other central nervous system diseases.
Differential Diagnosis
Depressive disorders not due to another medical condition. Determination of whether
a medical condition accompanying a depressive disorder is causing the disorder depends
on a) the absence of an episode(s) of depressive episodes prior to the onset of the medical
Other Specified Depressive Disorder 183
condition, b) the probability that the associ ated medical condition has a potential to pro-
mote or cause a depressive disorder, and c) a course of the depressive symptoms shortly
after the onset or worsening of  the medical condition, especially if the depressive symp-
toms remit near the time that the medical disorder is effectively treated or remits.
Medication-induced depressive disorder. An important caveat is that some medical con-
ditions are treated with medications (e.g., steroi ds or alpha-interferon) that can induce depres-
sive or manic symptoms. In these cases, clinical  judgment, based on all the evidence in hand, is
the best way to try to separate the most likely and/or the most important of two etiological fac-
tors (i.e., association with the medical condition vs. a substance-induced syndrome).
Adjustment disorders. It is important to differentiate a depressive episode from an ad-
justment disorder, as the onset of the medical co ndition is in itself a life stressor that could
bring on either an adjustment disorder or an episode of major depression. The major dif-
ferentiating elements are the pervasiveness the depressive picture and the number and
quality of the depressive symptoms that the pa tient reports or demonstrates on the mental
status examination. The differential diagnosis of the associated medical conditions is rel-
evant but largely beyond the scope of the present manual. 
Comorbidity
Conditions comorbid with depressive disorder  due to another medical condition are those
associated with the medical conditions of etio logical relevance. It has been noted that de-
lirium can occur before or along with depres sive symptoms in individuals with a variety
of medical conditions, such as Cushing’s di sease. The association of anxiety symptoms,
usually generalized symptoms, is common in depressive disorders, regardless of cause.
Other Specified Depressive Disorder
311 (F32.8)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a depressive
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the depressive disorders di agnostic class. The other specified depressive
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the
specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific depressive
disorder. This is done by recording “other specified depressive disorder” followed by the
specific reason (e.g., “short-duration depressive episode”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1.Recurrent brief depression:  Concurrent presence of depressed mood and at least
four other symptoms of depression for 2–13 days at least once per month (not associ-
ated with the menstrual cycle) for at least 12 consecutive months in an individual
whose presentation has never met criteria for any other depressive or bipolar disorder
and does not currently meet active or residual criteria for any psychotic disorder.
2.Short-duration depressi ve episode (4–13 days): Depressed affect and at least four
of the other eight symptoms of a major depressive episode associated with clinically
significant distress or impairment that persists for more than 4 days, but less than 14 days,
in an individual whose presentation has never  met criteria for any other depressive or
bipolar disorder, does not currently meet active  or residual criteria for any psychotic dis-
order, and does not meet criteria for recurrent brief depression.
3.Depressive episode with insufficient symptoms:  Depressed affect and at least one
of the other eight symptoms of a major depressive episode associated with clinically
184 Depressive Disorders
significant distress or impairment that persist for at least 2 weeks in an individual
whose presentation has never met criteria for any other depressive or bipolar disorder,
does not currently meet active or residual criteria for any psychotic disorder, and does
not meet criteria for mixed anxiety and depressive disorder symptoms.
Unspecified Depressive Disorder
311 (F32.9)
This category applies to presentations in whic h symptoms characteristic of a depressive dis-
order that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other im-
portant areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders
in the depressive disorders diagnostic class. Th e unspecified depressive disorder category is
used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are
not met for a specific depressive disorder, and includes presentations for which there is insuf-
ficient information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).
Specifiers for Depressive Disorders
Specify if:
With anxious distress:  Anxious distress is defined as the presence of at least two of
the following symptoms during the majority of days of a major depressive episode or
persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia):
1. Feeling keyed up or tense.
2. Feeling unusually restless.
3. Difficulty concentrating because of worry.
4. Fear that something awful may happen.
5. Feeling that the individual might lose control of himself or herself.
Specify current severity:
Mild:  Two symptoms.
Moderate: Three symptoms.
Moderate-severe:  Four or five symptoms.
Severe:  Four or five symptoms and with motor agitation.
Note:  Anxious distress has been noted as a prominent feature of both bipolar and ma-
jor depressive disorder in both primary care  and specialty mental health settings. High
levels of anxiety have been associated with higher suicide risk, longer duration of ill-
ness, and greater likelihood of treatment nonresponse. As a result, it is clinically useful
to specify accurately the presence and severity levels of anxious distress for treatment
planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
With mixed features:  
A. At least three of the following manic/hypomanic symptoms are present nearly every
day during the majority of days of a major depressive episode:
1. Elevated, expansive mood.
2. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
3. More talkative than usual or pressure to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Increase in energy or goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or
sexually).
Specifiers for Depressive Disorders 185
6. Increased or excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for
painful consequences (e.g., engaging in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual in-
discretions, foolish business investments).
7. Decreased need for sleep (feeling rested despite sleeping less than usual; to be
contrasted with insomnia).
B. Mixed symptoms are observable by others and represent a change from the per-
son’s usual behavior.
C. For individuals whose symptoms meet full criteria for either mania or hypomania,
the diagnosis should be bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
D. The mixed symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication or other treatment).
Note:  Mixed features associated with a major depressive episode have been found
to be a significant risk factor for the development of bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
As a result, it is clinically useful to note the presence of this specifier for treatment
planning and monitoring of response to treatment.
With melancholic features:
A. One of the following is present during the most severe period of the current epi-
sode:
1. Loss of pleasure in all, or almost all, activities.
2. Lack of reactivity to usually pleasurable stimuli (does not feel much better, even
temporarily, when something good happens).
B. Three (or more) of the following:
1. A distinct quality of depressed mood characterized by profound despondency,
despair, and/or moroseness or by so-called empty mood.
2. Depression that is regularly worse in the morning.
3. Early-morning awakening (i.e., at least 2 hours before usual awakening).
4. Marked psychomotor agitation or retardation.
5. Significant anorexia or weight loss.
6. Excessive or inappropriate guilt.
Note:  The specifier “with melancholic features” is applied if these features are present
at the most severe stage of the episode. There is a near-complete absence of the ca-
pacity for pleasure, not merely a diminution. A guideline for evaluating the lack of reac-
tivity of mood is that even highly desired events are not associated with marked
brightening of mood. Either mood does not bri ghten at all, or it brightens only partially
(e.g., up to 20%–40% of normal for only minutes at a time). The “distinct quality” of mood
that is characteristic of the “with melancholic features” specifier is experienced as qual-
itatively different from that during a nonm elancholic depressive episode. A depressed
mood that is described as merely more severe, longer lasting, or present without a rea-
son is not considered distinct in quality. Psychomotor changes are nearly always pres-
ent and are observable by others.
Melancholic features exhibit only a modest tendency to repeat across episodes in the
same individual. They are more frequent in inpatients, as opposed to outpatients; are
less likely to occur in milder than in more severe major depressive episodes; and are
more likely to occur in those with psychotic features.
With atypical features:  This specifier can be applied when these features predomi-
nate during the majority of days of the current or most recent major depressive episode
or persistent depressive disorder. 
A. Mood reactivity (i.e., mood brightens in response to actual or potential positive
events).
186 Depressive Disorders
B. Two (or more) of the following: 
1. Significant weight gain or increase in appetite.
2. Hypersomnia.
3. Leaden paralysis (i.e., heavy, leaden feelings in arms or legs).
4. A long-standing pattern of interpersonal rejection sensitivity (not limited to epi-
sodes of mood disturbance) that results in significant social or occupational im-
pairment.
C. Criteria are not met for “with melancholic  features” or “with catatonia” during the
same episode.
Note:  “Atypical depression” has historical significance (i.e., atypical in contradistinction
to the more classical agitated, “endogenous” presentations of depression that were the
norm when depression was rarely diagnosed in outpatients and almost never in ado-
lescents or younger adults) and today does not connote an uncommon or unusual clin-
ical presentation as the term might imply.
Mood reactivity is the capacity to be cheered up when presented with positive events
(e.g., a visit from children, compliments from others). Mood may become euthymic (not
sad) even for extended periods of time if the external circumstances remain favorable.
Increased appetite may be manifested by an obvious increase in food intake or by
weight gain. Hypersomnia may include either an extended period of nighttime sleep or
daytime napping that totals at least 10 hours of sleep per day (or at least 2 hours more
than when not depressed). Leaden paralysis is defined as feeling heavy, leaden, or
weighted down, usually in the arms or legs. This sensation is generally present for at
least an hour a day but often lasts for many  hours at a time. Unlike the other atypical
features, pathological sensitivity to perceived interpersonal rejection is a trait that has
an early onset and persists throughout most of adult life. Rejection sensitivity occurs
both when the person is and is not depressed, though it may be exacerbated during
depressive periods.
With psychotic features:  Delusions and/or hallucinations are present.
With mood-congruent psychotic features: The content of all delusions and hal-
lucinations is consistent with the typical depressive themes of personal inade-
quacy, guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment.
With mood-incongruent psychotic features:  The content of the delusions or hal-
lucinations does not involve typical depressive themes of personal inadequacy,
guilt, disease, death, nihilism, or deserved punishment, or the content is a mixture
of mood-incongruent and mood-congruent themes.
With catatonia:  The catatonia specifier can apply to an episode of depression if cata-
tonic features are present during most of the episode. See criteria for catatonia asso-
ciated with a mental disorder (for a description of catatonia, see the chapter
“Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders”).
With peripartum onset:  This specifier can be applied to the current or, if full criteria
are not currently met for a major depressive episode, most recent episode of major de-
pression if onset of mood symptoms occurs during pregnancy or in the 4 weeks follow-
ing delivery.
Note:  Mood episodes can have their onset either during pregnancy or postpartum.
Although the estimates differ according to the period of follow-up after delivery, be-
tween 3% and 6% of women will experience the onset of a major depressive epi-
sode during pregnancy or in the weeks or months following delivery. Fifty percent
of “postpartum” major depressive episodes actually begin prior to delivery. Thus,
these episodes are referred to collectively as peripartum episodes. Women with
peripartum major depressive episodes often have severe anxiety and even panic
Specifiers for Depressive Disorders 187
attacks. Prospective studies have demonstrated that mood and anxiety symptoms
during pregnancy, as well as the “baby blues,” increase the risk for a postpartum
major depressive episode.
Peripartum-onset mood episodes can pres ent either with or without psychotic
features. Infanticide is most often associated with postpartum psychotic episodes
that are characterized by command hallucinations to kill the infant or delusions that
the infant is possessed, but psychotic symptoms can also occur in severe postpar-
tum mood episodes without such specific delusions or hallucinations.
Postpartum mood (major depressive or manic) episodes with psychotic features
appear to occur in from 1 in 500 to 1 in 1,000 deliveries and may be more common
in primiparous women. The risk of postpartum episodes with psychotic features is
particularly increased for women with prior postpartum mood episodes but is also
elevated for those with a prior history of a depressive or bipolar disorder (especially
bipolar I disorder) and those with a family history of bipolar disorders.
Once a woman has had a postpartum episode with psychotic features, the risk
of recurrence with each subsequent delivery is between 30% and 50%. Postpartum
episodes must be differentiated from delirium occurring in the postpartum period,
which is distinguished by a fluctuating level of awareness or attention. The postpar-
tum period is unique with respect to the degree of neuroendocrine alterations and
psychosocial adjustments, the potential impact of breast-feeding on treatment
planning, and the long-term implications of a history of postpartum mood disorder
on subsequent family planning.
With seasonal pattern: This specifier applies to recurrent major depressive disorder.
A. There has been a regular temporal relationship between the onset of major depres-
sive episodes in major depressive disorder and a particular time of the year (e.g.,
in the fall or winter).
Note:  Do not include cases in which there is an obvious effect of seasonally related
psychosocial stressors (e.g., regularly being unemployed every winter).
B. Full remissions (or a change from major depression to mania or hypomania) also
occur at a characteristic time of the year (e.g., depression disappears in the spring).
C. In the last 2 years, two major depressive episodes have occurred that demonstrate
the temporal seasonal relationships defined above and no nonseasonal major de-
pressive episodes have occurred during that same period.
D. Seasonal major depressive episodes (as described above) substantially outnum-
ber the nonseasonal major depressive episodes that may have occurred over the
individual’s lifetime.
Note:  The specifier “with seasonal pattern” can be applied to the pattern of major de-
pressive episodes in major depressive disor der, recurrent. The essential feature is the
onset and remission of major depressive episodes at characteristic times of the year.
In most cases, the episodes begin in fall or winter and remit in spring. Less commonly,
there may be recurrent summer depressive episodes. This pattern of onset and remis-
sion of episodes must have occurred during at least a 2-year period, without any non-
seasonal episodes occurring during this period. In addition, the seasonal depressive
episodes must substantially outnumber any nonseasonal depressive episodes over
the individual’s lifetime.
This specifier does not apply to those situations in which the pattern is better ex-
plained by seasonally linked psychosocial stressors (e.g., seasonal unemployment or
school schedule). Major depressive episodes that occur in a seasonal pattern are often
characterized by prominent energy, hypersomn ia, overeating, weight gain, and a crav-
ing for carbohydrates. It is unclear whether a seasonal pattern is more likely in recur-
rent major depressive disorder or in bipol ar disorders. However, within the bipolar
disorders group, a seasonal pattern appears to be more likely in bipolar II disorder than
188 Depressive Disorders
in bipolar I disorder. In some individuals, the onset of manic or hypomanic episodes
may also be linked to a particular season.
The prevalence of winter-type seasonal pattern appears to vary with latitude, age,
and sex. Prevalence increases with higher latitudes. Age is also a strong predictor of
seasonality, with younger persons at higher risk for winter depressive episodes.
Specify if:
In partial remission:  Symptoms of the immediately previous major depressive episode
are present, but full criteria are not met, or there is a period lasting less than 2 months
without any significant symptoms of a major depressive episode following the end of
such an episode.
In full remission:  During the past 2 months, no significant signs or symptoms of the
disturbance were present.
Specify current severity:
Severity is based on the number of criterion symptoms, the severity of those symptoms,
and the degree of functional disability.
Mild:  Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis are
present, the intensity of the symptoms is distressing but manageable, and the symp-
toms result in minor impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Moderate: The number of symptoms, intensity of symptoms, and/or functional impair-
ment are between those specified for “mild” and “severe.”
Severe:  The number of symptoms is substantially in excess of that required to make
the diagnosis, the intensity of the symptoms is seriously distressing and unmanage-
able, and the symptoms markedly interfere with social and occupational functioning.