461Disruptive, Impulse-Control,
and Conduct Disorders
Disruptive, impulse-control,  and conduct disorders include conditions involv-
ing problems in the self-control of emotions  and behaviors. While other disorders in DSM-
5 may also involve problems in  emotional and/or behavioral  regulation, the disorders in
this chapter are unique in that these problems  are manifested in behaviors that violate the
rights of others (e.g., aggression, destructio n of property) and/or that bring the individual
into significant conflict with societal norms or  authority figures. The underlying causes of
the problems in the self-control of emotions  and behaviors can vary greatly across the dis-
orders in this chapter and among individu als within a given diagnostic category. 
The chapter includes opposition al defiant disorder, intermi ttent explosive disorder, con-
duct disorder, antisocial person ality disorder (which is described in the chapter “Personality
Disorders”), pyromania, kleptomania, and ot her specified and unspecified disruptive, im-
pulse-control, and conduct disorders. Althou gh all the disorders in the chapter involve
problems in both emotional and behavioral re gulation, the source of variation among the
disorders is the relative emphas is on problems in the two types of self-control. For example,
the criteria for conduct disorder focus largely on poorly controlled behaviors that violate the
rights of others or that violat e major societal norms. Many of  the behavioral symptoms (e.g.,
aggression) can be a result of poorly controlled  emotions such as anger. At the other extreme,
the criteria for intermittent explosive disorder  focus largely on such poorly controlled emo-
tion, outbursts of anger that are disproportionate to the interpersonal or other provocation
or to other psychosocial  stressors. Intermediate in impact to these two disorders is opposi-
tional defiant disorder, in which the criteria  are more evenly distributed between emotions
(anger and irritation) and be haviors (argumentati veness and defiance). Pyromania and
kleptomania are less commonly used diagnoses characterized by poor impulse control re-
lated to specific behaviors (fire setting or stealing) that reliev e internal tension. Other speci-
fied disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder is a category for conditions in which
there are symptoms of conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, or other disruptive,
impulse-control, and conduct disorders, but th e number of symptoms does not meet the di-
agnostic threshold for any of th e disorders in this chapter, even though there is evidence of
clinically significant impairment  associated with the symptoms. 
The disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders all tend to be more common in
males than in females, although the relative degree of male predominance may differ both
across disorders and within a disorder at differe nt ages. The disorders in  this chapter tend to
have first onset in childhood or adolescence. In fact, it is very rare for ei ther conduct disorder or
oppositional defiant disorder to first emerge in adulthood. There is a developmental relation-
ship between oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder, in th at most cases of con-
duct disorder previously would have met criteria for opposition al defiant disorder, at least in
those cases in which conduct disorder emerges prior to adolescence. However, most children
with oppositional defiant disorder do not ev entually develop conduct disorder. Furthermore,
children with opposition al defiant disorder are at risk fo r eventually developing other prob-
lems besides conduct disorder, includ ing anxiety and depr essive disorders.
Many of the symptoms that define the disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disor-
ders are behaviors that can occur to some degree in typically developing individuals.
Thus, it is critical that the frequency, persistence , pervasiveness across situations, and im-
462 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
pairment associated with the behaviors indica tive of the diagnosis be considered relative
to what is normative for a person’s age, gend er, and culture when determining if they are
symptomatic of a disorder. 
The disruptive, impulse-control, and conduc t disorders have been linked to a common
externalizing spectrum associated with the personality dimensions labeled as disinhibition
and (inversely) constraint  and, to a lesser extent, negative emotionality. These shared per-
sonality dimensions could acco unt for the high level of como rbidity among these disorders
and their frequent comorbidity with substanc e use disorders and antisocial personality
disorder. However, the specific nature of th e shared diathesis that constitutes the exter-
nalizing spectrum remains unknown. 
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 313.81 (F91.3)
A. A pattern of angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant behavior, or vindictiveness lasting
at least 6 months as evidenced by at least four symptoms from any of the following cate-
gories, and exhibited during interaction with at least one individual who is not a sibling.
Angry/Irritable Mood
1. Often loses temper.
2. Is often touchy or easily annoyed.
3. Is often angry and resentful.
Argumentative/Defiant Behavior
4. Often argues with authority figures or, for children and adolescents, with adults.
5. Often actively defies or refuses to comply with requests from authority figures or
with rules.
6. Often deliberately annoys others.
7. Often blames others for his or her mistakes or misbehavior.
Vindictiveness
8. Has been spiteful or vindictive at least twice within the past 6 months.
Note:  The persistence and frequency of these behaviors should be used to distinguish
a behavior that is within normal limits from a behavior that is symptomatic. For children
younger than 5 years, the behavior should occur on most days for a period of at least
6 months unless otherwise noted (Criterion A8). For individuals 5 years or older, the
behavior should occur at least once per week for at least 6 months, unless otherwise
noted (Criterion A8). While these frequency criteria provide guidance on a minimal lev-
el of frequency to define symptoms, other factors should also be considered, such as
whether the frequency and intensity of the behaviors are outside a range that is nor-
mative for the individual’s developmental level, gender, and culture.
B. The disturbance in behavior is associated with distress in the individual or others in his or
her immediate social context (e.g., family, peer  group, work colleagues), or it impacts neg-
atively on social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. 
C. The behaviors do not occur exclusively during the course of a psychotic, substance
use, depressive, or bipolar disorder. Also, the criteria are not met for disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder.
Specify current severity:
Mild:  Symptoms are confined to only one setting (e.g., at home, at school, at work, with
peers).
Oppositional Defiant Disorder 463
Moderate: Some symptoms are present in at least two settings.
Severe:  Some symptoms are present in three or more settings.
Specifiers
It is not uncommon for individuals with oppositional defiant disorder to show symptoms
only at home and only with family member s. However, the pervasiveness of the symp-
toms is an indicator of the severity of the disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of oppositional defiant disorder is a frequent and persistent pattern
of angry/irritable mood, argumentative/defi ant behavior, or vindictiveness (Criterion
A). It is not unusual for individuals with oppositional defiant disorder to show the behav-
ioral features of the disorder without proble ms of negative mood. However, individuals
with the disorder who show the angry/irrita ble mood symptoms typically show the be-
havioral features as well. 
The symptoms of oppositional  defiant disorder may be confined to only one setting,
and this is most frequently the home. Indi viduals who show enough symptoms to meet
the diagnostic threshold, even if it is only at  home, may be significantly impaired in their
social functioning. However, in more severe cases, the symptoms of the disorder are pres-
ent in multiple settings. Given that the pervas iveness of symptoms is an indicator of the
severity of the disorder, it is critical that the individual’s behavior be assessed across mul-
tiple settings and relationships. Because these behaviors are common among siblings, they
must be observed during interactions with  persons other than siblings. Also, because
symptoms of the disorder are ty pically more evident in intera ctions with adults or peers
whom the individual knows well, they may not be apparent during a clinical examination. 
The symptoms of oppositional defiant disord er can occur to some degree in individu-
als without this disorder. There are several ke y considerations for de termining if the be-
haviors are symptomatic of oppo sitional defiant disorder. First, the diagnostic threshold
of four or more symptoms within the preceding 6 months must be met. Second, the per-
sistence and frequency of the symptoms should  exceed what is normative for an individ-
ual’s age, gender, and culture. For example, it is not unusual for preschool children to
show temper tantrums on a weekly basis. Te mper outbursts for a preschool child would be
considered a symptom of oppositional defiant d isorder only if they occurred on most days
for the preceding 6 months, if they occurred with at least three other symptoms of the dis-
order, and if the temper outbursts contribu ted to the significant impairment associated
with the disorder (e.g., led to destruction of  property during outbursts, resulted in the
child being asked to leave a preschool). 
The symptoms of the disorder often are part  of a pattern of pr oblematic interactions
with others. Furthermore, individuals with this  disorder typically do not regard themselves
as angry, oppositional, or defian t. Instead, they often justify their behavior as a response to
unreasonable demands or circumstances. Thus, it can be difficult to disentangle the rela-
tive contribution of the individual with the disorder to the problematic interactions he or
she experiences. For example, children with oppositional defiant disorder may have ex-
perienced a history of hostile parenting, and it is often impossible to determine if the
child’s behavior caused the parents to act in a more hostile manner toward the child, if the
parents’ hostility led to the ch ild’s problematic behavior, or if there was so me combination
of both. Whether or not the clinician can sepa rate the relative contributions of potential
causal factors should not influence whether or not the diagnosis is made. In the event that
the child may be living in particularly poor conditions where neglect or mistreatment may
occur (e.g., in institutional settings), clinical attention to reducing the contribution of the
environment may be helpful. 
464 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
In children and adolescents, oppositional defian t disorder is more prevalent in families in
which child care is disrupted by a succession of different caregivers or in families in which
harsh, inconsistent, or negl ectful child-rearing practice s are common. Two of the most
common co-occurring conditions with oppositi onal defiant disorder are attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)  and conduct disorder (see the section “Comorbidity” for
this disorder). Oppositional defiant disorder has been associated with increased risk for
suicide attempts, even after comorb id disorders are controlled for. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of oppositional defiant disord er ranges from 1% to 11%, with an average
prevalence estimate of around 3.3%. The rate of oppositional defiant disorder may vary
depending on the age and gender of the child . The disorder appears to be somewhat more
prevalent in males than in females (1.4:1) pr ior to adolescence. This male predominance is
not consistently found in samples of adolescents or adults. 
Development and Course
The first symptoms of oppositional defiant di sorder usually appear during the preschool
years and rarely later than early adolescence.  Oppositional defiant disorder often precedes
the development of conduct disorder, especial ly for those with the childhood-onset type
of conduct disorder. However, many children and adolescents with oppositional defiant
disorder do not subsequently develop cond uct disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder
also conveys risk for the development of anxi ety disorders and major depressive disorder,
even in the absence of conduct disorder. The defiant, argumentative,  and vindictive symp-
toms carry most of the risk for conduct disorder, whereas the angry-irritable mood symp-
toms carry most of the risk for emotional disorders. 
Manifestations of the disorder across de velopment appear consistent. Children and
adolescents with oppositional defiant disorder are at increase d risk for a number of prob-
lems in adjustment as adults, including anti social behavior, impu lse-control problems,
substance abuse, anxiety, and depression.
Many of the behaviors associated with oppositional defiant disorder increase in fre-
quency during the preschool period and in adol escence. Thus, it is especially critical dur-
ing these development periods that the freq uency and intensity of these behaviors be
evaluated against normative leve ls before it is decided that they are symptoms of opposi-
tional defiant disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Features
Temperamental. Temperamental factors related to problems in emotional regulation
(e.g., high levels of emotiona l reactivity, poor frustration to lerance) have been predictive
of the disorder.
Environmental. Harsh, inconsistent, or neglectful child-rearing practices are common in
families of children and adolescents with oppo sitional defiant disorder, and these parent-
ing practices play an important role in many causal theories of the disorder. 
Genetic and physiological. A number of neurobiological markers (e.g., lower heart rate
and skin conductance reactivity; reduced basal cortisol reactivity; abnormalities in the pre-
frontal cortex and amygdala) have been associated with oppositional defiant disorder.
However, the vast majority of studies have not separated children with oppositional de-
fiant disorder from those with conduct diso rder. Thus, it is unclear whether there are
markers specific to oppositional defiant disorder.
Oppositional Defiant Disorder 465
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The prevalence of the disorder in children an d adolescents is relatively consistent across
countries that differ in race and ethnicity.
Functional Consequences of 
Oppositional Defiant Disorder
When oppositional defiant disorder is pers istent throughout deve lopment, individuals
with the disorder experience frequent conflic ts with parents, teachers, supervisors, peers,
and romantic partners. Such problems often re sult in significant impairments in the indi-
vidual’s emotional, social, academ ic, and occupational adjustment. 
Differential Diagnosis
Conduct disorder. Conduct disorder and oppositional defiant disorder are both related
to conduct problems that  bring the individual in conflict  with adults and other authority
figures (e.g., teachers, work supervisors). Th e behaviors of oppositional defiant disorder
are typically of a less severe nature than those of conduct disorder and do not include ag-
gression toward people or anima ls, destruction of property, or a pattern of theft or deceit.
Furthermore, oppositional defian t disorder includes problems  of emotional dysregulation
(i.e., angry and irritable mood) that are not in cluded in the definition of conduct disorder. 
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. ADHD is often comorbid  with oppositional de-
fiant disorder. To make the additional diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder, it is impor-
tant to determine that the indivi dual’s failure to conform to requ ests of others is not solely in
situations that demand sustained effort and attention or demand that the individual sit still. 
Depressive and bipolar disorders. Depressive and bipolar di sorders often involve neg-
ative affect and irritability. As a result, a di agnosis of oppositional defiant disorder should
not be made if the symptoms occur exclusiv ely during the course of a mood disorder. 
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder shares with dis-
ruptive mood dysregulation disorder the symp toms of chronic negative mood and temper
outbursts. However, the severity, frequency, and chronicity of temp er outbursts are more
severe in individuals with di sruptive mood dysregulation disorder than in those with
oppositional defiant disorder. Thus, only a minority of ch ildren and adolescents whose
symptoms meet criteria for oppo sitional defiant disorder woul d also be diagnosed with dis-
ruptive mood dysregulation disorder. When the mood disturbance is severe enough to meet
criteria for disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant dis-
order is not given, even if all criteria for oppositional defiant disorder are met.
Intermittent explosive disorder. Intermittent explosive disorder also involves high
rates of anger. However, indi viduals with this disorder sh ow serious aggr ession toward
others that is not part of the defini tion of oppositional defiant disorder. 
Intellectual disability (intell ectual developmental disorder). In individuals with intel-
lectual disability, a diagnosis of oppositional defiant disorder is gi ven only if the opposi-
tional behavior is markedly greater than  is commonly observed among individuals of
comparable mental age and with comparab le severity of intellectual disability. 
Language disorder. Oppositional defiant disorder must  also be distinguished from a
failure to follow directions that is the resu lt of impaired language comprehension (e.g.,
hearing loss). 
Social anxiety disorder (social phobia). Oppositional defiant disord er must also be dis-
tinguished from defiance due to  fear of negative evaluation associated with social anxiety
disorder.
466 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Comorbidity 
Rates of oppositional defiant disorder are mu ch higher in samples of children, adoles-
cents, and adults with ADHD, and this may be the result of shared temperamental risk fac-
tors. Also, oppositional defiant disorder of ten precedes conduct di sorder, although this
appears to be most common in children wi th the childhood-onset subtype. Individuals
with oppositional defiant disorder are also at  increased risk for anxiety disorders and ma-
jor depressive disorder, and this seems largel y attributable to the presence of the angry-
irritable mood symptoms. Adolescents and adul ts with oppositional defiant disorder also
show a higher rate of substance use disorders, al though it is unclear if this association is in-
dependent of the comorbidity with conduct disorder. 
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 312.34 (F63.81)
A. Recurrent behavioral outbursts representing a failure to control aggressive impulses
as manifested by either of the following:
1. Verbal aggression (e.g., temper tantrums, tirades, verbal arguments or fights) or
physical aggression toward property, animals, or other individuals, occurring twice
weekly, on average, for a period of 3 months. The physical aggression does not re-
sult in damage or destruction of property and does not result in physical injury to
animals or other individuals. 
2. Three behavioral outbursts involving damage or destruction of property and/or
physical assault involving physical injury against animals or other individuals occur-
ring within a 12-month period. 
B. The magnitude of aggressiveness expressed during the recurrent outbursts is grossly
out of proportion to the provocation or to any precipitating psychosocial stressors. 
C. The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not premeditated (i.e., they are impulsive and/
or anger-based) and are not committed to achieve some tangible objective (e.g.,
money, power, intimidation).
D. The recurrent aggressive outbursts cause either marked distress in the individual or
impairment in occupational or interpersonal functioning, or are associated with finan-
cial or legal consequences. 
E. Chronological age is at least 6 years (or equivalent developmental level).
F. The recurrent aggressive outbursts are not better explained by another mental disor-
der (e.g., major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder, a psychotic disorder, antisocial personality disorder, borderline personality
disorder) and are not attributable to another  medical condition (e.g., head trauma, Alz-
heimer’s disease) or to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication). For children ages 6–18 years, aggressive behavior that occurs as part
of an adjustment disorder should not be considered for this diagnosis. 
Note:  This diagnosis can be made in addition to the diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyper-
activity disorder, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disorder, or autism spectrum dis-
order when recurrent impulsive aggressive outbursts are in excess of those usually seen
in these disorders and warrant independent clinical attention.
Diagnostic Features
The impulsive (or anger-based) aggressive outb ursts in intermittent explosive disorder have
a rapid onset and, typically, li ttle or no prodromal period. Ou tbursts typically last for less
Intermittent Explosive Disorder 467
than 30 minutes and commonly occur in respon se to a minor provocation by a close intimate
or associate. Individuals with intermittent ex plosive disorder often have less severe epi-
sodes of verbal and/or nondamaging, nondestruc tive, or noninjurious physical assault (Cri-
terion A1) in between more severe destructive/ assaultive episodes (Cri terion A2). Criterion
A1 defines frequent (i.e., twice weekly, on aver age, for a period of 3 months) aggressive out-
bursts characterized by  temper tantrums, tirades, verbal  arguments or fights, or assault
without damage to objects or without injury to animals or other individuals. Criterion A2
defines infrequent (i.e., three in a 1-year pe riod) impulsive aggressi ve outbursts character-
ized by damaging or destroying an object, regardless of its tangible value, or by assaulting/
striking or otherwise causing physical injury to an animal or to another individual. Regard-
less of the nature of the impulsive aggressive outburst, the core feature of intermittent
explosive disorder is failure to control impulsiv e aggressive behavior in  response to subjec-
tively experienced provocation (i.e., psychosocial  stressor) that would not typically result in
an aggressive outburst (Criterion B). The aggressive outbursts are generally impulsive and/
or anger-based, rather than premeditated or instrumental (Criterion C) and are associated
with significant distress or impairment in psyc hosocial function (Cri terion D). A diagnosis
of intermittent explosive disorder should not be given to individuals younger than 6 years,
or the equivalent developmental level (Criterion  E), or to individual s whose aggressive out-
bursts are better explained by another mental di sorder (Criterion F). A diagnosis of intermit-
tent explosive disorder should not be gi ven to individuals with disruptive mood
dysregulation disorder or to individuals whose impulsive aggressive outbursts are attribut-
able to another medical condition or to the phys iological effects of a substance (Criterion F).
In addition, children ages 6–18 years should not receive this diagnosis when impulsive ag-
gressive outbursts occur in the context of an adjustment disorder (Criterion F). 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
Mood disorders (unipolar), anxiety disorders, and substance use disorders are associated
with intermittent explosive di sorder, although onset of thes e disorders is typically later
than that of intermitte nt explosive disorder. 
Prevalence
One-year prevalence data for intermittent expl osive disorder in the United States is about
2.7% (narrow definition). Intermittent explosive disorder is more prevalent among
younger individuals (e.g., youn ger than 35–40 years), compared with older individuals
(older than 50 years), and in individuals with a high school education or less. 
Development and Course
The onset of recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive beha vior is most common in late
childhood or adolescence and ra rely begins for the first time  after age 40 years. The core
features of intermitte nt explosive disorder, typically, ar e persistent and continue for many
years.
The course of the disorder may be episodic, with recurrent periods of impulsive ag-
gressive outbursts. Intermittent  explosive disorder appears to follow a chronic and persis-
tent course over many years. It also appears to be quite common regardless of the presence
or absence of attentio n-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or disruptive, impulse-
control, and conduct disorders (e.g., conduct disorder, oppo sitional defiant disorder). 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Individuals with a history of physica l and emotional trauma during the
first two decades of life are at increased risk for intermittent  explosive disorder. 
468 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Genetic and physiological. First-degree relatives of individuals with intermittent ex-
plosive disorder are at increase d risk for intermittent explos ive disorder, and twin studies
have demonstrated a substantial geneti c influence for impulsive aggression. 
Research provides neurobiolo gical support for the presence of serotonergic abnormal-
ities, globally and in the brain, specifically in areas of the limbic sy stem (anterior cingulate)
and orbitofrontal cortex in individuals with  intermittent explos ive disorder. Amygdala
responses to anger stimuli, during function al magnetic resonance imaging scanning, are
greater in individuals with intermittent expl osive disorder compared with healthy indi-
viduals.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
The lower prevalence of intermittent explosive disorder in some regions (Asia, Middle
East) or countries (Romania, Nigeria), compared  with the United States, suggests that in-
formation about recurrent, prob lematic, impulsive aggressive behaviors either is not elic-
ited on questioning or is less likely to be present, because of cultural factors.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In some studies the prevalence of intermittent explosive diso rder is greater in males than
in females (odds ratio = 1.4–2.3); other st udies have found no gender difference. 
Functional Consequences of 
Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Social (e.g., loss of friends, relatives, marita l instability), occupational (e.g., demotion, loss
of employment), financial (e.g., due to value of objects destroyed), and legal (e.g., civil
suits as a result of aggressive behavior against person or prop erty; criminal charges for as-
sault) problems often develop as a result of intermit tent explosive disorder. 
Differential Diagnosis
A diagnosis of intermittent ex plosive disorder shou ld not be made when Criteria A1 and/
or A2 are only met during an  episode of another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive
disorder, bipolar disorder, psychotic disorder ), or when impulsive aggressive outbursts
are attributable to another me dical condition or to the physio logical effects of a substance
or medication. This diagnosis also should not be made, particularly in children and ado-
lescents ages 6–18 years, when the impulsive aggressive outbursts occur in the context of
an adjustment disorder. Other examples in which recurrent, proble matic, impulsive ag-
gressive outbursts may, or may not, be diag nosed as intermittent explosive disorder in-
clude the following. 
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. In contrast to intermittent explosive disorder,
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is charac terized by a persistently  negative mood state
(i.e., irritability, anger) most of the day, nearly every day, between impulsive aggressive out-
bursts. A diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregul ation disorder can only be given when the on-
set of recurrent, problematic, impulsive aggressive outbursts is before age 10 years. Finally, a
diagnosis of disruptive mood dysregulation di sorder should not be made for the first time
after age 18 years. Otherwise, these diagnoses are mutually exclusive. 
Antisocial personality disorder or  borderline personality disorder. Individuals with an-
tisocial personality disorder or borderline personality disorder often display recurrent,
problematic impulsive aggressive outbursts. However, the level of impulsive aggression
in individuals with antisocial personality di sorder or borderline personality disorder is
lower than that in individuals with  intermittent explosive disorder.
Conduct Disorder 469
Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, an d personality change due to another med-
ical condition, aggressive type. A diagnosis of intermittent ex plosive disorder should not
be made when aggressive outbur sts are judged to result from the physiological effects of an-
other diagnosable medical condition (e.g., brain in jury associated with a change in personality
characterized by aggressive outbursts; comple x partial epilepsy). Nonspecific abnormalities
on neurological examination (e.g., “soft signs”) and nonspecific electroencephalographic
changes are compatible with a diagnosis of interm ittent explosive disorder  unless there is a di-
agnosable medical condition that better expl ains the impulsive aggressive outbursts. 
Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal. A diagnosis of inte rmittent explosive
disorder should not be made when impulsive aggressive outbursts are nearly always as-
sociated with intoxicati on with or withdrawal from substa nces (e.g., alcohol, phencyclidine,
cocaine and other stimulants, barbiturates, inhalants). However, when  a sufficient number
of impulsive aggressive outbur sts also occur  in the absence of substance intoxication or
withdrawal, and these warrant in dependent clinical attention,  a diagnosis of intermittent
explosive disorder may be given. 
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, conduct disorder, oppositional defiant disor-
der, or autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with any of these childhood-onset dis-
orders may exhibit impulsive aggressive outbursts. Individu als with ADHD are typically
impulsive and, as a result, may also exhibit impulsive aggressive outbursts. While indi-
viduals with conduct disorder can exhibit impulsive aggressive outbur sts, the form of ag-
gression characterized by the diagnostic criter ia is proactive and predatory. Aggression in
oppositional defiant disorder is typically char acterized by temper ta ntrums and verbal ar-
guments with authority figures, whereas impu lsive aggressive outbursts in intermittent
explosive disorder are in response to a broader array of provocation and include physical
assault. The level of impulsive aggression in individuals with a history of one or more of
these disorders has been reported as lower than that in comparab le individuals whose
symptoms also meet intermitte nt explosive disorder Criteria  A through E. Accordingly, if
Criteria A through E are also met, and the impulsive aggressive out bursts warrant inde-
pendent clinical attention, a diagnosis of intermittent expl osive disorder may be given. 
Comorbidity
Depressive disorders, anxiet y disorders, and substance us e disorders are most commonly
comorbid with intermittent explosive disord er. In addition, individuals with antisocial
personality disorder or borderline personality disorder, and individuals with a history of
disorders with disruptive beha viors (e.g., ADHD, conduct di sorder, oppositional defiant
disorder), are at greater risk for como rbid intermittent explosive disorder.
Conduct Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in which the basic rights of others or ma-
jor age-appropriate societal norms or rules ar e violated, as manifested by the presence
of at least three of the following 15 criteria in the past 12 months from any of the cate-
gories below, with at least one criter ion present in the past 6 months:
Aggression to People and Animals
1. Often bullies, threatens, or intimidates others.
2. Often initiates physical fights.
3. Has used a weapon that can cause serious physical harm to others (e.g., a bat,
brick, broken bottle, knife, gun).
470 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
4. Has been physically cruel to people.
5. Has been physically cruel to animals.
6. Has stolen while confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, purse snatching, extortion,
armed robbery).
7. Has forced someone into sexual activity.
Destruction of Property
8. Has deliberately engaged in fire setting with the intention of causing serious damage.
9. Has deliberately destroyed others’ property (other than by fire setting).
Deceitfulness or Theft
10. Has broken into someone else’s house, building, or car.
11. Often lies to obtain goods or favors or to avoid obligations (i.e., “cons” others).
12. Has stolen items of nontrivial value without confronting a victim (e.g., shoplifting,
but without breaking and entering; forgery).
Serious Violations of Rules
13. Often stays out at night despite parental prohibitions, beginning before age 13 years.
14. Has run away from home overnight at least twice while living in the parental or pa-
rental surrogate home, or once without returning for a lengthy period.
15. Is often truant from school, beginning before age 13 years.
B. The disturbance in behavior causes clinically significant impairment in social, aca-
demic, or occupational functioning.
C. If the individual is age 18 years or older, criteria are not met for antisocial personality
disorder.
Specify whether:
312.81 (F91.1) Childhood-onset type:  Individuals show at least one symptom char-
acteristic of conduct disorder prior to age 10 years.
312.82 (F91.2) Adolescent-onset type:  Individuals show no symptom characteristic
of conduct disorder prior to age 10 years. 
312.89 (F91.9) Unspecified onset:  Criteria for a diagnosis of conduct disorder are
met, but there is not enough information available to determine whether the onset of
the first symptom was before or after age 10 years. 
Specify if:
With limited prosocial emotions:  To qualify for this specifier, an individual must have dis-
played at least two of the following characteristics persistently over at least 12 months and
in multiple relationships and settings. These characteristics reflect the individual’s typical
pattern of interpersonal and emotional functioning over this period and not just occasional
occurrences in some situations. Thus, to assess the criteria for the specifier, multiple infor-
mation sources are necessary. In addition to the individual’s self-report, it is necessary to
consider reports by others who have know n the individual for extended periods of time
(e.g., parents, teachers, co-workers, extended family members, peers).
Lack of remorse or guilt:  Does not feel bad or guilty when he or she does some-
thing wrong (exclude remorse when expre ssed only when caught and/or facing
punishment). The individual shows a general  lack of concern about the negative
consequences of his or her actions. For ex ample, the individual is not remorseful
after hurting someone or does not care about the consequences of breaking rules.
Callous—lack of empathy:  Disregards and is unconcerned about the feelings of
others. The individual is described as cold and uncaring. The person appears more
concerned about the effects of his or her actions on himself or herself, rather than
their effects on others, even when they result in substantial harm to others.
Conduct Disorder 471
Unconcerned about performance: Does not show concern about poor/problem-
atic performance at school, at work, or in other important activities. The individual
does not put forth the effort necessary to perform well, even when expectations are
clear, and typically blames other s for his or her poor performance.
Shallow or deficient affect:  Does not express feelings or show emotions to others,
except in ways that seem shallow, insincere,  or superficial (e.g., actions contradict the
emotion displayed; can turn emotions “on” or “off” quickly) or when emotional expres-
sions are used for gain (e.g., emotions displayed to manipulate or intimidate others).
Specify current severity:
Mild:  Few if any conduct problems in excess of those required to make the diagnosis
are present, and conduct problems cause relatively minor harm to others (e.g., lying,
truancy, staying out after dark without permission, other rule breaking).
Moderate: The number of conduct problems and the effect on others are intermediate
between those specified in “mild” and those in “severe” (e.g., stealing without confront-
ing a victim, vandalism).
Severe:  Many conduct problems in excess of those required to make the diagnosis are
present, or conduct problems cause considerable harm to others (e.g., forced sex, physical
cruelty, use of a weapon, stealing while c onfronting a victim, breaking and entering).
Subtypes
Three subtypes of conduct disorder are provided based on the age at onset of the disorder.
Onset is most accurately estimated with information from both the youth and the care-
giver; estimates are often 2 years later than actu al onset. Both subtypes can occur in a mild,
moderate, or severe form. An unspecified-onse t subtype is designated when there is in-
sufficient information to determine age at onset.
In childhood-onset conduct disorder, indivi duals are usually male, frequently display
physical aggression toward others, have disturbed peer rela tionships, may have had op-
positional defiant disorder during early ch ildhood, and usually have symptoms that meet
full criteria for conduct disord er prior to puberty. Many children with this subtype also
have concurrent attention-deficit/hyperactiv ity disorder (ADHD) or other neurodevel-
opmental difficulties. Individuals with childho od-onset type are more  likely to have per-
sistent conduct disorder into adulthood than are those with adolescent-onset type. As
compared with individuals with childhood-ons et type, individuals with adolescent-onset
conduct disorder are less likely to display a ggressive behaviors and tend to have more
normative peer relationships (although they often display conduct problems in the com-
pany of others). These individuals are less lik ely to have conduct disorder that persists into
adulthood. The ratio of males to  females with conduct disorder is more balanced for the
adolescent-onset type than for the childhood-onset type.
Specifiers
A minority of individuals with conduct disorder exhibit characteristics that qualify for the
“with limited prosocial emotions” specifier. The indicators of  this specifier are those that
have often been labeled as callous and unemot ional traits in research. Other personality
features, such as thrill seeking, fearlessness, and insensitivity to punishment, may also dis-
tinguish those with characteri stics described in the specifier. Individuals with character-
istics described in this specifier may be mo re likely than other individuals with conduct
disorder to engage in aggression that is planned for instrumental gain. Individuals with
conduct disorder of any subtype or any level of  severity can have characteristics that qual-
ify for the specifier “with limited prosocial em otions,” although individuals with the spec-
ifier are more likely to have childhood-onset ty pe and a severity specifier rating of severe.
472 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Although the validity of self-report to assess the presence of the specifier has been sup-
ported in some research contexts, individual s with conduct disorder with this specifier
may not readily admit to the traits in a clinical interview. Thus, to assess the criteria for the
specifier, multiple information sources are ne cessary. Also, because the indicators of the
specifier are characteristics that reflect the in dividual’s typical pattern of interpersonal and
emotional functioning, it is important to co nsider reports by others who have known the
individual for extended periods of time an d across relationships and settings (e.g., par-
ents, teachers, co-workers, extended family members, peers).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of conduct disorder is a repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior
in which the basic rights of others or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are vi-
olated (Criterion A). These be haviors fall into four main groupings: aggressive conduct
that causes or threatens physical harm to other people or animals (Criteria A1–A7); non-
aggressive conduct that causes property loss or damage (Criteria A8–A9); deceitfulness or
theft (Criteria A10–A12); and serious violations  of rules (Criteria A13–A15). Three or more
characteristic behaviors must ha ve been present during the pa st 12 months, with at least
one behavior present in the past 6 months. The disturbance in behavior causes clinically
significant impairment in social, academic, or  occupational functioning (Criterion B). The
behavior pattern is usually pres ent in a variety of settings, su ch as home, at school, or in
the community. Because individu als with conduct disorder ar e likely to minimize their
conduct problems, the clinician often must rely on additional informants. However, infor-
mants’ knowledge of the individual’s conduct problems may be limited if they have inad-
equately supervised the individual or the individual has concealed symptom behaviors.
Individuals with conduct disorder often initiate aggressive behavior and react aggres-
sively to others. They may display bullying, th reatening, or intimidating behavior (includ-
ing bullying via messaging on Web-based social  media) (Criterion A1); initiate frequent
physical fights (Criteri on A2); use a weapon that can caus e serious physical harm (e.g., a bat,
brick, broken bottle, knife, gun) (Criterion A3);  be physically cruel to people (Criterion A4)
or animals (Criterion A5); steal while confronting a victim (e.g., mugging, purse snatching,
extortion, armed robbery) (Criterion A6); or force someone into sexual activity (Criterion A7).
Physical violence may take the form of rape, assault, or, in rare cases, homicide. Deliberate
destruction of others’ property may include delibe rate fire setting with the intention of caus-
ing serious damage (Criterion A8) or deliberate destroying of  other people’s property in
other ways (e.g., smashing car windows, vandal izing school property) (C riterion A9). Acts of
deceitfulness or theft may include breaking into someone else’s house, building, or car (Crite-
rion A10); frequently lying or breaking promises  to obtain goods or favors or to avoid debts
or obligations (e.g., “conning” other individual s) (Criterion A11); or stealing items of non-
trivial value without confronting the victim (e.g.,  shoplifting, forgery, fraud) (Criterion A12).
Individuals with conduct diso rder may also frequently commit serious violations of
rules (e.g., school, parental, workplace). Children with cond uct disorder often have a pat-
tern, beginning before age 13 years, of stay ing out late at night despite parental prohi-
bitions (Criterion A13). Children may also show a pattern of running away from home
overnight (Criterion A14). To be considered  a symptom of conduct disorder, the running
away must have occurred at le ast twice (or only once if the individual did not return for a
lengthy period). Runaway episodes that occur as a direct consequence of physical or sex-
ual abuse do not typically qualify for this criterion. Children with conduct disorder may
often be truant from school, beginning prior to age 13 years (Criterion A15).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Especially in ambiguous situ ations, aggressive individual s with conduct disorder fre-
quently misperceive the intentio ns of others as more hostile  and threatening than is the
Conduct Disorder 473
case and respond with aggression that they th en feel is reasonable and justified. Person-
ality features of trait negative emotionality and poor self-control, including poor frustra-
tion tolerance, irritability, temper outbursts,  suspiciousness, insens itivity to punishment,
thrill seeking, and recklessnes s, frequently co-occur with conduct disorder. Substance
misuse is often an associated fe ature, particularly in adolescent females. Suicidal ideation,
suicide attempts, and completed suicide occur at  a higher-than-expected rate in individu-
als with conduct disorder. 
Prevalence
One-year population prevalence estimates range from 2% to more than 10%, with a median
of 4%. The prevalence of conduct disorder a ppears to be fairly consistent across various
countries that differ in race and ethnicity. Pr evalence rates rise from  childhood to adoles-
cence and are higher among males than amon g females. Few children with impairing con-
duct disorder receive treatment.
Development and Course
The onset of conduct disorder may occur as ea rly as the preschool years, but the first sig-
nificant symptoms usually emerge during the period from middle childhood through
middle adolescence. Oppositi onal defiant disorder is a common precursor to the child-
hood-onset type of conduct disorder. Conduct disorder may be diagnosed in adults, how-
ever, symptoms of conduct di sorder usually emerge in ch ildhood or adol escence, and
onset is rare after age 16 years. The course of  conduct disorder after onset is variable. In a
majority of individuals, the disorder remits by adulthood. Many individuals with conduct
disorder—particularly those with adolescent-onset type and those with few and milder
symptoms—achieve adequate social and occupa tional adjustment as adults. However, the
early-onset type predicts a worse prognosis and an increased risk of criminal behavior,
conduct disorder, and substance-related disord ers in adulthood. Individuals with conduct
disorder are at risk for later mood disorders, anxiety disorders, posttraumatic stress dis-
order, impulse-control disord ers, psychotic disorders, so matic symptom disorders, and
substance-related disorders as adults. 
Symptoms of the disorder vary with age as the individual develops increased physical
strength, cognitive abilities, and sexual ma turity. Symptom behaviors that emerge first
tend to be less serious (e.g., lying, shoplifti ng), whereas conduct problems that emerge last
tend to be more severe (e.g., rape, theft wh ile confronting a victim ). However, there are
wide differences among individuals, with some enga ging in the more damaging behaviors
at an early age (which is predictive of a worse prognosis). When individuals with conduct
disorder reach adulthood, symptoms of aggres sion, property destruction, deceitfulness,
and rule violation, including violence against co-workers, partners, and children, may be ex-
hibited in the workplace and the home, such that antisocial personality disorder may be
considered. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Temperamental risk factors include a difficult undercontrolled infant
temperament and lower-than-average intelligence , particularly with regard to verbal IQ.
Environmental. Family-level risk factors include parental rejection and neglect, inconsis-
tent child-rearing practices, harsh discipline, physical or sexual abuse, lack of supervision,
early institutional living, freque nt changes of caregivers, large family size, parental criminal-
ity, and certain kinds of familial psychopath ology (e.g., substance-related disorders). Com-
munity-level risk factors include peer rejection, association with a delinquent peer group,
and neighborhood exposure to violence. Both types of risk factors te nd to be more common
and severe among individuals with the child hood-onset su btype of conduct disorder. 
474 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Genetic and physiological. Conduct disorder is influenced by both genetic and envi-
ronmental factors. The risk is increased in child ren with a biological or adoptive parent or
a sibling with conduct disorder. The disorder also appears to be more common in children
of biological parents with severe alcohol us e disorder, depressive and bipolar disorders, or
schizophrenia or biological parents who have  a history of ADHD or conduct disorder.
Family history particularly characterizes in dividuals with the childhood-onset subtype of
conduct disorder. Slower resting heart rate has been reliably noted in individuals with
conduct disorder compared with those without the disorder, and this marker is not char-
acteristic of any other mental  disorder. Reduced autonomic fe ar conditioning, particularly
low skin conductance, is also well documented. However, these psychophysiological find-
ings are not diagnostic of the disorder. Structural and functional differences in brain areas
associated with affect regulation and affect processing, particularly frontotemporal-limbic
connections involving the brain’s ventral pref rontal cortex and amygdala, have been con-
sistently noted in individuals with conduct d isorder compared with those without the dis-
order. However, neuroimaging findings are not diagnostic of the disorder.
Course modifiers. Persistence is more likely for indi viduals with behaviors that meet
criteria for the childhood-onset subtype and qualify for the specifier “with limited pro-
social emotions”. The risk that conduct disorder will persist is also increased by co-occurring
ADHD and by substance abuse. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Conduct disorder diagnosis may at times be potentially misapplied to individuals in set-
tings where patterns of disruptive behavior are viewed as near-normative (e.g., in very
threatening, high-crime areas or war zones). Therefore, the context in which the undesir-
able behaviors have occurr ed should be considered.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males with a diagnosis of conduct disorder frequently exhibit fighting, stealing, vandalism,
and school discipline problems. Females with a diagnosis of conduct disorder are more likely
to exhibit lying, truancy, running away, subs tance use, and prostitution. Whereas males tend
to exhibit both physical aggression and relation al aggression (behavior that harms social re-
lationships of others), females tend to exhibit relatively more relational aggression.
Functional Consequences  of Conduct Disorder 
Conduct disorder behaviors may lead to sch ool suspension or expulsion, problems in
work adjustment, legal difficulties, sexually  transmitted diseases, unplanned pregnancy,
and physical injury from accidents or fights . These problems may preclude attendance in
ordinary schools or living in a parental or foster home. Conduct disorder is often associ-
ated with an early onset of sexual behavior, alcohol use, to bacco smoking, use of illegal
substances, and reckless and risk-taking acts. Ac cident rates appear to be higher among in-
dividuals with conduct disord er compared with those without the disorder. These func-
tional consequences of conduct disorder may predict health difficulties when individuals
reach midlife. It is not uncommon for individu als with conduct disorder to come into con-
tact with the criminal justice system for engaging in illegal behavior. Conduct disorder is
a common reason for treatment referral and is frequently diagnosed in mental health fa-
cilities for children, especially in forensic practice. It is associated with impairment that is
more severe and chronic than that expe rienced by other clinic-referred children.
Differential Diagnosis
Oppositional defiant disorder. Conduct disorder and oppositi onal defiant disorder are
both related to symptoms that bring the indi vidual in conflict with adults and other au-
Conduct Disorder 475
thority figures (e.g., parents, teachers, work supervisors). The behaviors of oppositional
defiant disorder are typically of a less severe nature than those of individuals with conduct
disorder and do not include aggression towa rd individuals or animals, destruction of
property, or a pattern of theft or deceit. Fu rthermore, oppositional defiant disorder in-
cludes problems of emotional dysregulation (i.e ., angry and irritable mood) that are not in-
cluded in the definition of conduct disorder. When criteria are met for both oppositional
defiant disorder and conduct disord er, both diagnoses can be given.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Although children with  ADHD often exhibit
hyperactive and impulsive behavior that may be disruptive, this behavior does not by it-
self violate societal norms or the rights of others and therefore does not usually meet cri-
teria for conduct disorder. When criteria are met for both ADHD and conduct disorder, both
diagnoses should be given.
Depressive and bipolar disorders. Irritability, aggression, and conduct problems can
occur in children or adolescents with a majo r depressive disorder, a bipolar disorder, or
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. The behaviorial problems associated with these
mood disorders can usually be distinguished from the pattern of conduct problems seen in
conduct disorder based on their course. Spec ifically, persons with conduct disorder will
display substantial levels of aggressive or non-aggressive conduct problems during peri-
ods in which there is no mood disturbance, ei ther historically (i.e., a history of conduct
problems predating the onset of  the mood disturbance) or concurrently (i.e., display of
some conduct problems that ar e premeditated and do not occur during periods of intense
emotional arousal). In those cases in which cr iteria for conduct disorder and a mood dis-
order are met, both diagnoses can be given. 
Intermittent explosive disorder. Both conduct disorder and intermittent explosive dis-
order involve high rates of aggression. However, the aggression in individuals with inter-
mittent explosive disorder is limited to impu lsive aggression and is not premeditated, and
it is not committed in order to achieve some tangible objectiv e (e.g., money, power, intim-
idation). Also, the definition of intermittent  explosive disorder does not include the non-
aggressive symptoms of conduct disorder. If criteria for both  disorders are met, the diag-
nosis of intermittent explosive disorder sh ould be given only when  the recurrent impul-
sive aggressive outbursts warrant in dependent clinical attention. 
Adjustment disorders. The diagnosis of an adjustment di sorder (with disturbance of con-
duct or with mixed disturbance of emotions an d conduct) should be co nsidered if clinically
significant conduct problems that  do not meet the criteria for another specific disorder de-
velop in clear association with the onset of a psychosocial stressor and do not resolve within
6 months of the termination of the stressor (o r its consequences). Cond uct disorder is diag-
nosed only when the conduct problems represen t a repetitive and pers istent pattern that is
associated with impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning.
Comorbidity
ADHD and oppositional defiant disorder are both common in individuals with conduct
disorder, and this comorbid presentation pr edicts worse outcomes.  Individuals who show
the personality features associated with anti social personality disorder often violate the
basic rights of others or violate major age-appr opriate societal norms, and as a result their
pattern of behavior often meets criteria fo r conduct disorder. Conduct disorder may also
co-occur with one or more of the following me ntal disorders: specif ic learning disorder,
anxiety disorders, depressive or bipolar diso rders, and substance-related disorders. Aca-
demic achievement, particularly in reading an d other verbal skills, is often below the level
expected on the basis of age and intelligence and may justify the additional diagnosis of
specific learning disorder or a communication disorder.
476 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Criteria and text for antisocial personality disorder can be found in the chapter “Person-
ality Disorders.” Because this disorder is closely connected to the spectrum of “external-
izing” conduct disorders in this chapter, as we ll as to the disorders in the adjoining chapter
“Substance-Related and Addictiv e Disorders,” it is dual code d here as well as in the chap-
ter “Personality Disorders.”
Pyromania
Diagnostic Criteria 312.33 (F63.1)
A. Deliberate and purposeful fire setting on more than one occasion.
B. Tension or affective arousal before the act.
C. Fascination with, interest in, curiosity about, or attraction to fire and its situational con-
texts (e.g., paraphernalia, uses, consequences).
D. Pleasure, gratification, or relief when setting fires or when witnessing or participating
in their aftermath.
E. The fire setting is not done for monetary gain, as an expression of sociopolitical ideol-
ogy, to conceal criminal activity, to express anger or vengeance, to improve one’s living
circumstances, in response to a delusion or hallucination, or as a result of impaired
judgment (e.g., in major neurocognitive disorder, intellectual disability [intellectual de-
velopmental disorder], substance intoxication).
F. The fire setting is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or anti-
social personality disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of pyromania is the pres ence of multiple episodes of deliberate and
purposeful fire setting (Criterion A). Individuals with this disorder experience tension or af-
fective arousal before setting a fi re (Criterion B). There is a f ascination with, interest in, cu-
riosity about, or attraction to fire and its situational contexts (e.g., paraphernalia, uses,
consequences) (Criterion C). Individuals with this disorder are often regular “watchers” at
fires in their neig hborhoods, may set off false alarms, and derive pleasure from institutions,
equipment, and personnel associat ed with fire. They may spend time at the local fire depart-
ment, set fires to be affiliated with the fire department, or even beco me firefighters. Individ-
uals with this disorder experi ence pleasure, gratification, or relief when setting the fire,
witnessing its effects, or participating in its aftermath (Criterion D). The fire setting is not
done for monetary gain, as an expression of so ciopolitical ideology, to conceal criminal ac-
tivity, to express anger or vengeance, to impr ove one’s living circumstances, or in response
to a delusion or a hallucination (Criterion E). The fire setting does not result from impaired
judgment (e.g., in major neurocog nitive disorder or intellectual disability [intellectual devel-
opmental disorder]). The diagnosis is not made if the fire setting is better explained by con-
duct disorder, a manic episode, or antiso cial personality disorder (Criterion F).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with pyromania may make considerable advance preparation for starting a
fire. They may be indifferent to  the consequences to life or property caused by the fire, or
Pyromania 477
they may derive satisfaction from the resulting property destruction. The behaviors may
lead to property damage, legal co nsequences, or injury or loss of  life to the fire setter or to
others. Individuals who impulsively set fires (who may or may not have pyromania) often
have a current or past history of alcohol use disorder.
Prevalence
The population prevalence of pyromania is no t known. The lifetime prevalence of fire set-
ting, which is just one component of pyromania and not sufficient for a diagnosis by itself,
was reported as 1.13% in a population sample, but the mo st common como rbidities were
antisocial personality disorder, substance use disorder, bipolar disorder, and pathological
gambling (gambling disorder). In contrast, pyromania as a primary diagnosis appears to
be very rare. Among a sample of persons reachi ng the criminal system with repeated fire
setting, only 3.3% had symptoms th at met full criteria  for pyromania. 
Development and Course
There are insufficient data to establish a typi cal age at onset of pyromania. The relation-
ship between fire setting in childhood and pyromania in adulthood has not been docu-
mented. In individuals with pyromania, fire -setting incidents are episodic and may wax
and wane in frequency. Longitudinal course is unknown. Although fire setting is a major
problem in children and adolescents (over 40% of  those arrested for arson offenses in the
United States are younger than 18 years), pyromania in childhood appears to be rare. Ju-
venile fire setting is usually associated with  conduct disorder, attention-deficit/hyperac-
tivity disorder, or an  adjustment disorder.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Pyromania occurs much more often in males, es pecially those with poorer social skills and
learning difficulties.
Differential Diagnosis
Other causes of intentional fire setting. It is important to rule out other causes of fire
setting before giving the diagnosis of pyroma nia. Intentional fire setting may occur for
profit, sabotage, or revenge; to  conceal a crime; to make a po litical statement (e.g., an act of
terrorism or protest); or to attract attention or recognition (e.g., setting a fire in order to dis-
cover it and save the day). Fire setting may also occur as part of developmental experi-
mentation in childhood (e.g., playing with matches, lighters, or fire). 
Other mental disorders. A separate diagnosis of pyromania is not given when fire set-
ting occurs as part of conduct disorder, a mani c episode, or antisocial personality disorder,
or if it occurs in response to a delusion or a hallucination (e.g., in schizophrenia) or is at-
tributable to the physiological effects of anot her medical condition (e.g., epilepsy). The di-
agnosis of pyromania should also not be gi ven when fire setting results from impaired
judgment associated with major neurocognitive  disorder, intellectual disability, or sub-
stance intoxication.
Comorbidity
There appears to be a high co-occurrence of substance use disorders,  gambling disorder,
depressive and bipolar disorder s, and other disruptive, impu lse-control, and conduct dis-
orders with pyromania.
478 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Kleptomania
Diagnostic Criteria 312.32 (F63.2)
A. Recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal objects that are not needed for personal
use or for their monetary value.
B. Increasing sense of tension immediately before committing the theft.
C. Pleasure, gratification, or relief at the time of committing the theft.
D. The stealing is not committed to express anger or vengeance and is not in response
to a delusion or a hallucination.
E. The stealing is not better explained by conduct disorder, a manic episode, or antisocial
personality disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of kleptomania is the recurrent failure to resist impulses to steal items
even though the items are not ne eded for personal use or for their monetary value (Criterion
A). The individual experiences a rising subjective  sense of tension before  the theft (Criterion B)
and feels pleasure, gratification, or relief when  committing the theft (Criterion C). The stealing
is not committed to express anger or vengeance, is not done in response to a delusion or hal-
lucination (Criterion D), and is  not better explained by conduc t disorder, a manic episode, or
antisocial personality disorder (Criterion E). The objects are stolen despite the fact that they are
typically of little value to the individual, who could have afforded to pay for them and often
gives them away or discards them. Occasionally  the individual may hoard the stolen objects or
surreptitiously return them. Al though individuals with this disorder will generally avoid
stealing when immediate arrest is probable (e.g., in full view of a po lice officer), they usually
do not preplan the thefts or fully take into ac count the chances of apprehension. The stealing is
done without assistance from, or collaboration with, others.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with kleptomania typically attempt to resist the impulse to steal, and they are
aware that the act is wrong and senseless. The individual frequently fears being appre-
hended and often feels depressed or guilty  about the thefts. Neurotransmitter pathways
associated with behavioral addictions, includ ing those associated with  the serotonin, do-
pamine, and opioid systems,  appear to play a role in kleptomania as well.
Prevalence
Kleptomania occurs in about 4%–24% of indivi duals arrested for shoplifting. Its preva-
lence in the general population is very rare, at approximately 0.3%–0.6%. Females outnum-
ber males at a ratio of 3:1.
Development and Course
Age at onset of kleptomania is variable, but th e disorder often begins in adolescence. How-
ever, the disorder may begin in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood, and in rare cases
in late adulthood. There is little systematic information on the course of kleptomania, but
three typical courses have been described: sp oradic with brief episodes and long periods
of remission; episodic with protracted peri ods of stealing and periods of remission; and
chronic with some degree of fluctuation. Th e disorder may continue for years, despite
multiple convictions for shoplifting.
Other Specified Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorder 479
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. There are no controlled family history studies of kleptoma-
nia. However, first-degree relatives of in dividuals with klepto mania may have higher
rates of obsessive-compulsive disorder than the general population. There also appears to
be a higher rate of substance use disorders, including alcohol use disorder, in relatives of
individuals with kleptomania than in the general population. 
Functional Consequenc es of Kleptomania
The disorder may cause legal, family , career, and personal difficulties.
Differential Diagnosis
Ordinary theft. Kleptomania should be distinguishe d from ordinary acts of theft or
shoplifting. Ordinary theft (whether planned or impulsive) is deliberate and is motivated
by the usefulness of the object or its monetary  worth. Some individuals, especially adoles-
cents, may also steal on a dare, as an act of re bellion, or as a rite of passage. The diagnosis
is not made unless other characteristic featur es of kleptomania are also present. Klepto-
mania is exceedingly rare, whereas sh oplifting is relatively common. 
Malingering. In malingering, individuals may simulate the symptoms of kleptomania to
avoid criminal prosecution. 
Antisocial personality disorder and conduct disorder. Antisocial personality disorder
and conduct disorder are distinguished from kleptomania by a general pattern of antiso-
cial behavior. 
Manic episodes, psychotic episodes, and major neurocognitive disorder. Kleptomania
should be distinguished from intentional or inadvertent stealing that may occur during a
manic episode, in response to delusions or ha llucinations (as in, e.g. , schizophrenia), or as
a result of a major neurocognitive disorder.
Comorbidity
Kleptomania may be associated with compulsive  buying as well as with depressive and
bipolar disorders (especially major depressive disorder), anxiety disorders, eating disor-
ders (particularly bulimia ner vosa), personality disorders, substance use disorders (espe-
cially alcohol use disorder), and other disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders. 
Other Specified Disruptive, Impulse-Control,
and Conduct Disorder
312.89 (F91.8)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a disruptive,
impulse-control, and conduct disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other impor tant areas of functioning predominate but do
not meet the full criteria for any of the disor ders in the disruptive, impulse-control, and con-
duct disorders diagnostic class. The other specified disruptive, impulse-control, and con-
duct disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate
the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific disrup-
tive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder. This  is done by recording “other specified dis-
ruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g.,
“recurrent behavioral outbursts of insufficient frequency”).
480 Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
Unspecified Disruptive, Impulse-Control,
 and Conduct Disorder
312.9 (F91.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a disruptive,
impulse-control, and conduct disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other impor tant areas of functioning predominate but do
not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the disruptive, impulse-control, and con-
duct disorders diagnostic class. The unspecif ied disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the rea-
son that the criteria are not met for a specific disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct dis-
order, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more
specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).