291Dissociative
 Disorders
Dissociative disorders  are characterized by a disrup tion of and/or discontinuity
in the normal integration of consciousness, memory, identity, emotion, perception, body
representation, motor control, and behavior. Dissociative symptoms can potentially dis-
rupt every area of psychological functioning.  This chapter includes dissociative identity
disorder, dissociative amnesia, depersonalization/derealization disorder, other specified
dissociative disorder, and unspecified dissociative disorder.
Dissociative symptoms are experienced as a)  unbidden intrusions into awareness and
behavior, with accompanying losses of continuity  in subjective experience (i.e., ‘‘positive’’
dissociative symptoms such as fragmentation of identity, depersonalization, and dereal-
ization) and/or b) inability to access inform ation or to control ment al functions that nor-
mally are readily amenable to access or contro l (i.e., “negative’’ dissociative symptoms such
as amnesia).
The dissociative disorders are frequently found in the af termath of trauma, and many
of the symptoms, including embarrassment an d confusion about the symptoms or a desire
to hide them, are influenced by the proximity to trauma. In DSM-5, the dissociative disor-
ders are placed next to, but are not part of, the trauma- and stressor-r elated disorders, re-
flecting the close relationship between these di agnostic classes. Both  acute stress disorder
and posttraumatic stress disorder contain di ssociative symptoms, such as amnesia, flash-
backs, numbing, and depersonalization/derealization.
Depersonalization/derealization disorder is characterized by clinically significant persis-
tent or recurrent depersonalizat ion (i.e., experiences of unreality or detachment from one’s
mind, self, or body) and/or derealization (i.e ., experiences of unreality or detachment from
one’s surroundings). These alte rations of experience are accompanied by intact reality
testing. There is no evidence of any distin ction between individuals with predominantly
depersonalization versus derealization sympto ms. Therefore, individuals with this disor-
der can have depersonalizatio n, derealization, or both.
Dissociative amnesia  is characterized by an inability to recall autobiographical informa-
tion. This amnesia may be localized (i.e., an even t or period of time), selective (i.e., a specific
aspect of an event), or generali zed (i.e., identity and life history). Dissociative amnesia is fun-
damentally an inability to recall autobiographic al information that is inconsistent with nor-
mal forgetting. It may or may not involve purp oseful travel or bewildered wandering (i.e.,
fugue). Although some individual s with amnesia promptly notice  that they have “lost time”
or that they have a gap in their memory, most individuals with dissocia tive disorders are ini-
tially unaware of their amnesias. For them, aw areness of amnesia occu rs only when personal
identity is lost or when circumstances make  these individuals awar e that autobiographical
information is missing (e.g., wh en they discover evidence of events they cannot recall or
when others tell them or ask th em about events they cannot reca ll). Until and unless this hap-
pens, these individuals have “amnesia for their amnesia.” Amnesia is experienced as an es-
sential feature of dissociative amnesia; individuals may experience localized or selective
amnesia most commonly, or generalized amnesia rarely. Dissociative fugue is rare in per-
sons with dissociative am nesia but common in dissoc iative identity disorder.
Dissociative identity disorder is characterized by a) the presence of two or more distinct
personality states or an experi ence of possession and b) recurrent episodes of amnesia. The
292 Dissociative Disorders
fragmentation of identity may vary with culture (e.g., possession-form presentations) and cir-
cumstance. Thus, individuals ma y experience discontinuities in identity and memory that
may not be immediately evident to others or are obscured by attempts to hide dysfunction. In-
dividuals with dissociative identity disorder experience a) recurrent, inexplicable intrusions
into their conscious functioning and sense of se lf (e.g., voices; dissociated actions and speech;
intrusive thoughts, emotions, and im pulses), b) alterations of sense of  self (e.g., attitudes, pref-
erences, and feeling like one’s body or actions are not one’s own), c) odd changes of perception
(e.g., depersonalization or derealization, such as feeling deta ched from one’s body while cut-
ting), and d) intermittent functional neurolog ical symptoms. Stress often produces transient
exacerbation of dissociative symptoms that makes them more evident.
The residual category of other specified disso ciative disorder has seven examples: chronic
or recurrent mixed dissociative symptoms that approach, but fall  short of, the diagnostic cri-
teria for dissociative identity disorder; dissociative states secondary to brainwashing or
thought reform; two acute presentations, of less than 1 month’s duration, of mixed dissociative
symptoms, one of which is also marked by the presence of psychotic symptoms; and three sin-
gle-symptom dissociative presentations—dissociat ive trance, dissociative stupor or coma, and
Ganser’s syndrome (the giving of  approximate and vague answers). 
Dissociative Identity Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 300.14 (F44.81)
A. Disruption of identity characterized by two or more distinct personality states, which
may be described in some cultures as an experience of possession. The disruption in
identity involves marked discontinuity in sense of self and sense of agency, accompa-
nied by related alterations in affect, behavior, consciousness, memory, perception,
cognition, and/or sensory-motor functioning. These signs and symptoms may be ob-
served by others or reported by the individual. 
B. Recurrent gaps in the recall of everyday events, important personal information, and/
or traumatic events that are inconsistent with ordinary forgetting.
C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning. 
D. The disturbance is not a normal part of a broadl y accepted cultural or religious practice.
Note:  In children, the symptoms are not better explained by imaginary playmates or
other fantasy play.
E. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
blackouts or chaotic behavior during alcohol intoxication) or anot her medical condition
(e.g., complex partial seizures).
Diagnostic Features 
The defining feature of dissocia tive identity disorder is the presence of two or more dis-
tinct personality states or an experience of  possession (Criterion  A). The overtness or
covertness of these personality states, howeve r, varies as a function of psychological
motivation, current level of st ress, culture, internal conflicts and dynamics, and emotional
resilience. Sustained periods of identity di sruption may occur when psychosocial pres-
sures are severe and/or prolonged. In many possession-form cases of  dissociative identity
disorder, and in a small proportion of non-po ssession-form cases, manifestations of alter-
nate identities are highly ove rt. Most individuals with non-possession-for m dissociative
identity disorder do not overtly display their discontinuity of identity for long periods of
time; only a small minority present to clinical attention wi th observable alternation of
Dissociative Identity Disorder 293
identities. When alternate personality states are not directly observ ed, the disorder can be
identified by two clusters of symptoms: 1) sudden alterations or discontinuities in sense of
self and sense of agency (Criterion A), and 2)  recurrent dissociative amnesias (Criterion B).
Criterion A symptoms are related to disconti nuities of experience that can affect any
aspect of an individual’s functioning. Indivi duals with dissociative identity disorder may
report the feeling that they have suddenly  become depersonalized observers of their
“own” speech and actions, which they may feel po werless to stop (sense of self). Such in-
dividuals may also report perceptions of voices (e.g., a child’s voice; crying; the voice of a
spiritual being). In some case s, voices are experienced as multiple, perplexing, indepen-
dent thought streams over which the individual  experiences no contro l. Strong emotions,
impulses, and even speech or other actions ma y suddenly emerge, without a sense of per-
sonal ownership or control (sense of agency).  These emotions and impulses are frequently
reported as ego-dystonic and puzzling. Atti tudes, outlooks, and personal preferences
(e.g., about food, activities, dress) may sudde nly shift and then shift back. Individuals may
report that their bodies feel different (e.g.,  like a small child, like the opposite gender, huge
and muscular). Alterations in sense of self and loss of personal agency may be accompa-
nied by a feeling th at these attitudes, emotions, an d behaviors—even  one’s body—are
“not mine” and/or are “not under my control.” Although most Criterion A symptoms are
subjective, many of these sudden discontinuitie s in speech, affect, and behavior can be wit-
nessed by family, friends, or the clinician.  Non-epileptic seizures and other conversion
symptoms are prominent in some presentation s of dissociative identity disorder, espe-
cially in some non-Western settings.
The dissociative amnesia of in dividuals with dissociative id entity disorder manifests in
three primary ways: as 1) gaps in remote me mory of personal life events (e.g., periods of
childhood or adolescence; some important lif e events, such as the death of a grandparent,
getting married, giving birth); 2) lapses in  dependable memory (e.g., of what happened
today, of well-learned skills such as how to do  their job, use a computer, read, drive); and
3) discovery of evidence of their everyday ac tions and tasks that they do not recollect do-
ing (e.g., finding unexplained objects in thei r shopping bags or am ong their possessions;
finding perplexing writings or drawings that they must have created; discovering injuries;
“coming to” in the midst of doing something). Dissociative fugues, wherein the person
discovers dissociated travel, are common. Thus, individuals with dissociative identity dis-
order may report that they have suddenly found themselves at the beach, at work, in a night-
club, or somewhere at home (e.g., in the clos et, on a bed or sofa, in the corner) with no
memory of how they came to be there. Amnesia in individuals with dissociative identity dis-
order is not limited to stressful or traumati c events; these individuals often cannot recall
everyday events as well.
Individuals with dissociative identity disorder vary in their awareness and attitude to-
ward their amnesias. It is common for these in dividuals to minimize their amnestic symp-
toms. Some of their amnestic behaviors may be  apparent to others—as when these persons
do not recall somethin g they were witnessed to have done or said, when they cannot
remember their own name, or when they do no t recognize their spouse, children, or close
friends.
Possession-form identities in dissociative identity  disorder typically manifest as be-
haviors that appear as if a “spirit,” supernatur al being, or outside person has taken control,
such that the individual begins speaking or acting in a distinctly different manner. For ex-
ample, an individual’s beha vior may give the appearance  that her identity has been
replaced by the “ghost” of a girl who co mmitted suicide in the same community years
before, speaking and acting as though she were  still alive. Or an individual may be “taken
over” by a demon or deity, re sulting in profound impairment , and demanding that the in-
dividual or a relative be punished for a past act, followed by more su btle periods of iden-
tity alteration. However, the majority of possession states around the world are normal,
usually part of spiritual practice, and do not meet criteria for dissociative identity disor-
294 Dissociative Disorders
der. The identities that arise during possessio n-form dissociative identity disorder present
recurrently, are unwanted and involuntary, cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment (Criterion C), and are not a normal part  of a broadly accepted cultural or religious
practice (Criterion D).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
Individuals with di ssociative identity disorder typically present with comorbid depression,
anxiety, substance abuse, self-injury, non-epileptic seizures, or another common symp-
tom. They often conceal, or are not fully aw are of, disruptions in consciousness, amnesia,
or other dissociative symptoms. Many individu als with dissociative identity disorder re-
port dissociative flashbacks during which they undergo a sensory reliving of a previous
event as though it were occurring in the presen t, often with a change of identity, a partial
or complete loss of contact wi th or disorientation to current  reality during the flashback,
and a subsequent amnesia for the content of the flashback. Individuals with the disorder
typically report multiple types of interpersonal maltreatment during childhood and adult-
hood. Nonmaltreatment forms of overwhelming early life events, such as multiple long,
painful, early-life medical pr ocedures, also may be reported. Self-mutilation and suicidal
behavior are frequent. On standardized meas ures, these individuals report higher levels
of hypnotizability and dissociativity compared with other clinical groups and healthy con-
trol subjects. Some individuals experience transient psychotic phenomena or episodes.
Several brain regions have been implicated in the pathophysiology of dissociative identity
disorder, including the orbito frontal cortex, hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, and
amygdala.
Prevalence
The 12-month preval ence of dissociative id entity disorder among adults in a small U.S.
community study was 1.5%. The prevalence ac ross genders in that study was 1.6% for
males and 1.4% for females. 
Development and Course
Dissociative identity disorder is associated  with overwhelming experiences, traumatic
events, and/or abuse oc curring in childhood. The full disorder may first manifest at al-
most any age (from earliest childhood to late life). Dissociation in children may generate
problems with memory, concentration, attach ment, and traumatic play . Nevertheless, chil-
dren usually do not present with  identity changes; instead they present primarily with over-
lap and interference among mental states (Cri terion A phenomena), with symptoms related
to discontinuities of experience. Sudden changes in identity during adolescence may ap-
pear to be just adolescent turmoil or the ea rly stages of another mental disorder. Older
individuals may present to treatment with what appear to be late-life mood disorders, ob-
sessive-compulsive disorder, paranoia, psycho tic mood disorders, or even cognitive dis-
orders due to dissociative amnesia. In some  cases, disruptive affects and memories may
increasingly intrude into aw areness with advancing age. 
Psychological decompensation and overt change s in identity may be triggered by 1) re-
moval from the traumatizing situation (e.g.,  through leaving home); 2) the individual’s
children reaching the same age at which the in dividual was originally abused or trauma-
tized; 3) later traumatic experiences, even seemingly inconsequential ones, like a minor
motor vehicle accident; or 4) th e death of, or the onset of a fatal illness in, their abuser(s).
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Interpersonal physical and sexual abus e is associated with an increased
risk of dissociative identity disorder. Prev alence of childhood abuse and neglect in the
Dissociative Identity Disorder 295
United States, Canada, and Europe among th ose with the disorder is about 90%. Other
forms of traumatizing experiences, includin g childhood medical and surgical procedures,
war, childhood prostitution, and terrorism, have been reported.
Course modifiers. Ongoing abuse, later-life retrauma tization, comorbid ity with mental
disorders, severe medical illness, and delay in appropriate treatment are associated with
poorer prognosis.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
Many features of dissociative identity disord er can be influenced by the individual’s cul-
tural background. Individuals with this disorder may pres ent with prominent medically
unexplained neurological symptoms, such as no n-epileptic seizures, paralyses, or sensory
loss, in cultural settings where such symptoms are common. Similarly, in settings where
normative possession is common (e.g., rural areas in the developing world, among certain
religious groups in the United States and Euro pe), the fragmented identities may take the
form of possessing spirits, de ities, demons, animals, or myth ical figures. Acculturation or
prolonged intercultural contact may shape the characteristics of  the other identities (e.g.,
identities in India may speak English exclu sively and wear Western clothes). Possession-
form dissociative identity diso rder can be distinguished from  culturally accepted posses-
sion states in that the former is involunta ry, distressing, uncontro llable, and often recur-
rent or persistent; involves conflict between  the individual and his or her surrounding
family, social, or work milieu; and is manifest ed at times and in places that violate the
norms of the culture or religion. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Females with dissociative identity disorder pr edominate in adult clinical settings but not
in child clinical settings. Adult males with dissociative identity disorder may deny their
symptoms and trauma  histories, and this can lead to el evated rates of false negative di-
agnosis. Females with dissociative identity di sorder present more frequently with acute
dissociative states (e.g., flashb acks, amnesia, fugue, function al neurological [conversion]
symptoms, hallucinations, self-mutilation). Ma les commonly exhibit more criminal or vi-
olent behavior than females; among males, comm on triggers of acute dissociative states in-
clude combat, prison conditions, and physical or sexual assaults.
Suicide Risk
Over 70% of outpatients with dissociative id entity disorder have attempted suicide; mul-
tiple attempts are common, and other self-inj urious behavior is frequent. Assessment of
suicide risk may be complicated when there is amnesia for past suicid al behavior or when
the presenting identity does no t feel suicidal and is unaware that other dissociated iden-
tities do. 
Functional Consequences of 
Dissociative Identity Disorder
Impairment varies widely, from apparently minimal (e.g., in high-functioning profession-
als) to profound. Regardless of level of disability, individuals with dissociative identity
disorder commonly minimize the impact of their dissociative an d posttraumatic symp-
toms. The symptoms of higher-functioning in dividuals may impair their relational, mar-
ital, family, and parenting functions more th an their occupational and professional life
(although the latter also may be affected). With appropriate treatment, many impaired in-
dividuals show marked improvement in occupational and personal functioning. How-
ever, some remain highly impaired in most ac tivities of living. These individuals may only
respond to treatment very slowly, with gr adual reduction in or improved tolerance of
296 Dissociative Disorders
their dissociative and posttraumatic sympto ms. Long-term supportive treatment may
slowly increase these individuals’ ability to  manage their symptoms  and decrease use of
more restrictive levels of care. 
Differential Diagnosis 
Other specified dissociative disorder. The core of dissociative identity disorder is the
division of identity, with recurrent disruption of conscious functioning and sense of self.
This central feature is sh ared with one form of other specified dissociative disorder, which
may be distinguished from dissociative identity disorder by the presence of chronic or re-
current mixed dissociative symptoms that do not meet Criterion A for dissociative identity
disorder or are not accomp anied by recurrent amnesia.
Major depressive disorder. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder are often de-
pressed, and their symptoms may appear to m eet the criteria for a major depressive episode.
Rigorous assessment indicates that this depression in some cases does not meet full criteria for
major depressive disorder. Othe r specified depressive disorder  in individual s with dissocia-
tive identity disorder often has an importan t feature: the depressed mood and cognitions fluc-
tuate  because they are experienced in some identity states but not others. 
Bipolar disorders. Individuals with dissociative iden tity disorder are often misdiag-
nosed with a bipolar disorder, mo st often bipolar II disorder. The relatively rapid shifts in
mood in individuals with this disorder—typica lly within minutes or hours, in contrast to
the slower mood changes typically seen in individuals with bipolar disorders—are due to
the rapid, subjective shifts in  mood commonly reported acro ss dissociative states, some-
times accompanied by fluctuation in levels of activation. Furtherm ore, in dissociative
identity disorder, elevated or depressed mood  may be displayed in conjunction with overt
identities, so one or the other mood may pred ominate for a relatively  long period of time
(often for days) or may shift within minutes.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Some traumatized individua ls have both posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and dissociative identity disorder. Accordingly, it is crucial to dis-
tinguish between individuals with PTSD only an d individuals who have both PTSD and
dissociative identity disorder. This different ial diagnosis requires that the clinician estab-
lish the presence or absence of dissociative sy mptoms that are not characteristic of acute
stress disorder or PTSD. Some individuals wi th PTSD manifest diss ociative symptoms that
also occur in dissociative identity disorder: 1) amnesia for some aspe cts of trauma, 2) dis-
sociative flashbacks (i.e., reliving of the trauma, with reduced awareness of one’s current
orientation), and 3) symptoms of intrusion an d avoidance, negative alterations in cogni-
tion and mood, and hyperarousal that are focu sed around the traumatic event. On the other
hand, individuals with dissociative identity disorder manifest dissociative symptoms that
are not a manifestation of PTSD: 1) amnesias for many everyday (i.e., nontraumatic) events,
2) dissociative flashbacks that may be followe d by amnesia for the content of the flashback,
3) disruptive intrusions (unrelated to trau matic material) by dissociated identity states
into the individual’s sense of self and agency, and 4) infrequent, full-blown changes
among different identity states.
Psychotic disorders. Dissociative identity disorder may be confused with schizophre-
nia or other psychotic disorders. The personified, internally communicative inner voices
of dissociative identity di sorder, especially of a child (e.g., “I hear a little girl crying in a
closet and an angry man yelling at her”), may be mistaken for psychotic hallucinations.
Dissociative experiences of identity fragmentat ion or possession, and of perceived loss of
control over thoughts, feelings, impulses, and acts, may be confused with signs of formal
thought disorder, such as thought insertion or withdrawal. Individu als with dissociative
identity disorder may also report visual, tact ile, olfactory, gustatory, and somatic halluci-
nations, which are usually related to posttrau matic an d dissociative factors, such as partial
Dissociative Identity Disorder 297
flashbacks. Individuals with dissociative iden tity disorder experience these symptoms as
caused by alternate identities, do not have  delusional explanations for the phenomena,
and often describe the symptoms in a personified way (e.g., “I feel like someone else wants
to cry with my eyes”). Persecutory and derogato ry internal voices in dissociative identity
disorder associated with depressive symptoms  may be misdiagnosed as major depression
with psychotic features. Chaotic identity change and acute intrusions that disrupt thought
processes may be distinguished from brief psychotic disorder by the predominance of dis-
sociative symptoms and amnesia for the episode,  and diagnostic evaluation after cessation
of the crisis can help confirm the diagnosis. 
Substance/medication-induced disorders. Symptoms associated with the physiological
effects of a substance can be distinguished from dissociative identity disorder if the sub-
stance in question is judged to be et iologically related to the disturbance.
Personality disorders. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder often present identi-
ties that appear to encapsulat e a variety of severe personality disorder features, suggesting a
differential diagnosis of personality disorder, especially of the borderline type. Importantly,
however, the individual’s longitudinal variabi lity in personality style (due to inconsistency
among identities) differs from the pervasive an d persistent dysfunctio n in affect management
and interpersonal relationships typical of those with personality disorders.
Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder). This disorder may be
distinguished from dissociative identity disord er by the absence of an identity disruption
characterized by two or more distinct personality states or an experience of possession.
Dissociative amnesia in conver sion disorder is more  limited and circumscribed (e.g., am-
nesia for a non-epileptic seizure).
Seizure disorders. Individuals with dissociative identity disorder may present with sei-
zurelike symptoms and behaviors that resemb le complex partial seizures with temporal
lobe foci. These include déjà vu, jamais vu, de personalization, derea lization, out-of-body
experiences, amnesia, disruptions of consci ousness, hallucinations, and other intrusion
phenomena of sensation, affect, and thought . Normal electroencep halographic findings,
including telemetry, differenti ate non-epileptic seiz ures from the seizurelike symptoms of
dissociative identity disorder. Also, individua ls with dissociative identity disorder obtain
very high dissociation scores, whereas indivi duals with complex partial seizures do not.
Factitious disorder and malingering. Individuals who feign dissociative identity disor-
der do not report the subtle symptoms of intr usion characteristic of the disorder; instead
they tend to overreport well-publicized symp toms of the disorder, such as dissociative
amnesia, while underreporting less-publicized  comorbid symptoms, such as depression.
Individuals who feign dissociative identity d isorder tend to be relatively undisturbed by
or may even seem to enjoy “having” the diso rder. In contrast, individuals with genuine
dissociative identity disorder tend to be ashamed of and overwhelmed by their symptoms
and to underreport their symptoms or deny th eir condition. Sequential observation, cor-
roborating history, and intensive psycho metric and psychological assessment may be
helpful in assessment.
Individuals who malinger dissociative identity  disorder usually create limited, stereo-
typed alternate identities, with feigned amnesia, related to the events for which gain is
sought. For example, they may present an “all-good” identity and an “all-bad” identity in
hopes of gaining exculpation for a crime.
Comorbidity
Many individuals with dissociative identity disorder present with a comorbid disorder. If
not assessed and treated specifically for the dissociative disorder, these individuals often
receive prolonged treatment for the comorbid diagnosis only, with limited overall treat-
ment response and resultant demoralization, and disability.
298 Dissociative Disorders
Individuals with dissociative identity disorder usually ex hibit a large number of co-
morbid disorders. In particular, most develo p PTSD. Other disorders that are highly co-
morbid with dissociative identity disorder include depressive di sorders, trauma- and
stressor-related disorders, personality diso rders (especially avoidant and borderline per-
sonality disorders), conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder),
somatic symptom disorder, eating disorders,  substance-related disorders, obsessive-
compulsive disorder, and sleep disorders. Dissociative alterations in identity, memory,
and consciousness may affect the sympto m presentation of comorbid disorders.
Dissociative Amnesia
Diagnostic Criteria 300.12 (F44.0)
A. An inability to recall important autobiographical information, usually of a traumatic or
stressful nature, that is inconsistent with ordinary forgetting.
Note:  Dissociative amnesia most often consists of localized or selective amnesia for a
specific event or events; or generalized amnesia for identity and life history.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., al-
cohol or other drug of abuse, a medication) or a neurological or other medical condition
(e.g., partial complex seizures, transient global amnesia, sequelae of a closed head in-
jury/traumatic brain injury, other neurological condition).
D. The disturbance is not better explained by dissociative identity disorder, posttraumatic
stress disorder, acute stress disorder, somatic symptom disorder, or major or mild neu-
rocognitive disorder.
Coding note: The code for dissociative amnesia without dissociative fugue is 300.12
(F44.0). The code for dissociative amnesia with dissociative fugue is 300.13 (F44.1).
Specify if:
300.13 (F44.1) With dissociative fugue:  Apparently purposeful travel or bewildered
wandering that is associated with amnesia for identity or for other important autobio-
graphical information.
Diagnostic Features
The defining characteristic of dissociative amnesia is an inability to recall important auto-
biographical information that 1) should be su ccessfully stored in me mory and 2) ordinar-
ily would be readily remembered (Criterion  A). Dissociative amnesia differs from the
permanent amnesias due to neurob iological damage or toxicity that prevent memory stor-
age or retrieval in that it is always potentially reversible because the memory has been suc-
cessfully stored. 
Localized amnesia,  a failure to recall events during a circumscribed period of time, is the
most common form of dissocia tive amnesia. Localized amnesi a may be broader than am-
nesia for a single traumatic event (e.g., months or years associated with child abuse or in-
tense combat). In selective amnesia,  the individual can recall some , but not all, of the events
during a circumscribed period of time. Thus, the individual may remember part of a trau-
matic event but not other parts. Some individu als report both localized and selective am-
nesias. 
Generalized amnesia,  a complete loss of memory for one’ s life history, is rare. Individuals
with generalized amnesia may forget personal  identity. Some lose previous knowledge
about the world (i.e., semantic knowledge) and can no longer access well-learned skills
Dissociative Amnesia 299
(i.e., procedural knowledge). Generalized amnesia has an acute onset; the perplexity, dis-
orientation, and purposeless wandering of individuals with generalized amnesia usually
bring them to the attention of the police or psychiatric emergency services. Generalized
amnesia may be more common among combat veterans, sexual  assault victims, and indi-
viduals experiencing extreme emotional stress or conflict. 
Individuals with dissociative amnesia are fr equently unaware (or only partially aware)
of their memory problems. Many, especially those with localized am nesia, minimize the
importance of their memory loss and may be come uncomfortable when prompted to ad-
dress it. In systematized amnesia,  the individual loses memory for a specific category of in-
formation (e.g., all memories relating to on e’s family, a particular person, or childhood
sexual abuse). In continuous amnesia,  an individual forgets each new event as it occurs.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Many individuals with dissociative amnesia are chronically impaired in their ability to
form and sustain satisfactory relationships. Histories of trauma, child abuse, and victim-
ization are common. Some indivi duals with dissociative amnesia report dissociative flash-
backs (i.e., behavioral reexperiencing of trau matic events). Many have a history of self-
mutilation, suicide attempts, and other high -risk behaviors. Depressive and functional
neurological symptoms are common, as are depersonalization, auto-hypnotic symptoms,
and high hypnotizability. Sexual dysfunctions are common. Mild traumatic brain injury
may precede dissociative amnesia. 
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence for dissociative amnesia among ad ults in a small U.S. commu-
nity study was 1.8% (1.0% fo r males; 2.6% for females). 
Development and Course
Onset of generalized amnesia is usually sudden . Less is known about the onset of localized
and selective amnesias because these amnesias ar e seldom evident, even to the individual.
Although overwhelming or intolerable events typically precede localized amnesia, its on-
set may be delayed for ho urs, days, or longer. 
Individuals may report multiple episodes of dissociative amnesia. A single episode
may predispose to future episodes. In between episodes of amnesia, the individual may or
may not appear to be acutely symptomatic. Th e duration of the forgotten events can range
from minutes to decades. Some episodes of  dissociative amnesia resolve rapidly (e.g.,
when the person is removed from combat or some other stressful situation), whereas other
episodes persist for long periods of time. So me individuals may grad ually recall the dis-
sociated memories years later. Dissociative capacities may decline with age, but not al-
ways. As the amnesia remits, there may be considerable distress, su icidal behavior, and
symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
Dissociative amnesia has been observed in young children, adolescents, and adults.
Children may be the most difficult to evaluate because they often have difficulty under-
standing questions about amnesia, and interviewers may find it difficult to formulate child-
friendly questions about memory and amnesia. Observations of apparent dissociative am-
nesia are often difficult to differentiate from inattention, absorption , anxiety, oppositional
behavior, and learning disorders. Reports fr om several different sources (e.g., teacher,
therapist, case worker) may be needed  to diagnose amnesia in children. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Single or repeated traumatic experiences (e.g., war, childhood maltreat-
ment, natural disaster, internment in conc entration camps, genocide) are common ante-
300 Dissociative Disorders
cedents. Dissociative amnesia is more likely to  occur with 1) a greater number of adverse
childhood experiences, particularly physical and/or sexual abuse, 2) interpersonal vio-
lence; and 3) increased severity, frequency, and violence of the trauma. 
Genetic and physiological. There are no genetic studies of  dissociative amnesia. Stud-
ies of dissociation report significant genetic an d environmental factors in both clinical and
nonclinical samples. 
Course modifiers. Removal from the traumatic circumstances underlying the dissociative
amnesia (e.g., combat) may bring about a rapid re turn of memory. The memory loss of indi-
viduals with dissociative fugue may be particularly refractory. Onset of PTSD symptoms may
decrease localized, selective, or systematized amnesia. The returning memory, however, may
be experienced as flashbacks that alternate wi th amnesia for the content of the flashbacks. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In Asia, the Middle East, and Latin America, non-epileptic seizures and other functional
neurological symptoms may accompany dissociat ive amnesia. In cultur es with highly re-
strictive social traditions, th e precipitants of dissociative  amnesia often do not involve
frank trauma. Instead, the amnesia is preceded by severe psychological stresses or con-
flicts (e.g., marital conflict, other family d isturbances, attachment problems, conflicts due
to restriction or oppression). 
Suicide Risk
Suicidal and other self-destructive behavior s are common in individuals with dissociative
amnesia. Suicidal behavior may be a particular risk when the amnesia remits suddenly
and overwhelms the individual  with intolerable memories.
Functional Consequences of Dissociative Amnesia 
The impairment of individuals with localized, selective, or systemat ized dissociative am-
nesia ranges from limited to severe. Individu als with chronic generalized dissociative am-
nesia usually have impairment in all aspects of functioning. Even when these individuals
“re-learn” aspects of their life history, au tobiographical memory remains very impaired.
Most become vocationally an d interpersonally disabled. 
Differential Diagnosis
Dissociative identity disorder. Individuals with dissociati ve amnesia may report de-
personalization and auto-hypnotic symptoms. In dividuals with dissociative identity dis-
order report pervasive disconti nuities in sense of self and agency, accompanied by many
other dissociative symptoms. The amnesias of individuals with localized, selective, and/
or systematized dissociative amnesias are relatively stable. Amnesias in dissociative iden-
tity disorder include amnesia for everyday events, finding of unexplained possessions,
sudden fluctuations in skills and knowledge, ma jor gaps in recall of life history, and brief
amnesic gaps in interpersonal interactions.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Some individuals with PTSD cannot recall part or all of
a specific traumatic event (e.g., a rape victim  with depersonalization and/or derealization
symptoms who cannot recall most events for the entire day of the rape). When that amne-
sia extends beyond the immediat e time of the trauma, a comorbid diagnosis of dissociative
amnesia is warranted. 
Neurocognitive disorders. In neurocognitive disorders, memory loss for personal infor-
mation is usually embedded in cognitive, lingu istic, affective, atte ntional, and behavioral
Dissociative Amnesia 301
disturbances. In dissociative amnesia, memory  deficits are primarily for autobiographical
information; intellectual and co gnitive abilities are preserved. 
Substance-related disorders. In the context of repeated intoxication with alcohol or
other substances/medications, there may be episod es of “black outs” or periods for which the
individual has no memory. To aid in distingu ishing these episodes from dissociative am-
nesia, a longitudinal history noting that the amnestic episodes occur only in the context of
intoxication and do no t occur in other situations would help identify the source as sub-
stance-induced; however the distinction may be difficult when the individual with dis-
sociative amnesia may also misuse alcohol or other substances in the context of stressful
situations that may also exac erbate dissociative symptoms. Some individuals with comor-
bid dissociative amnesia and substance use disorders will at tribute their memory prob-
lems solely to the substance use. Prolonged us e of alcohol or other substances may result in
a substance-induced neurocognitive disorder that may be associated with impaired cog-
nitive function, but in this co ntext the protracted history of  substance use and the persis-
tent deficits associated with the neurocognitive disorder would serve to distinguish it
from dissociative amnesia, wher e there is typically no evidence of persistent impairment in
intellectual functioning.
Posttraumatic amnesia due to brain injury. Amnesia may occur in th e context of a trau-
matic brain injury (TBI) when th ere has been an impact to th e head or other mechanisms of
rapid movement or displacement of the brain within the skull TBI. Other characteristics of
TBI include loss of consciousness, disorientati on and confusion, or, in more severe cases,
neurological signs (e.g., abnormalities on neuroimaging, a new onset of seizures or a marked
worsening of a preexisting seizure disorder, visual field cuts, anos mia). A neurocognitive
disorder attributable to TBI must present either  immediately after brain injury occurs or im-
mediately after the individual recovers consciousness after th e injury, and persist past the
acute post-injury period. The cognitive presenta tion of a neurocognitive disorder following
TBI is variable and includes difficulties in the domains of complex attention, executive func-
tion, learning and memory as well as slowed speed of information processing and distur-
bances in social cognition. Th ese additional features help di stinguish it from dissociative
amnesia. 
Seizure disorders. Individuals with seizure disorders may exhibit complex behavior dur-
ing seizures or post-ictally wi th subsequent amnesia. Some individuals with a seizure disorder
engage in nonpurposive wandering that is lim ited to the period of seizure activity. Con-
versely, behavior during a di ssociative fugue is usually purposeful, complex, and goal-
directed and may last for days, weeks, or long er. Occasionally, individuals with a seizure dis-
order will report that earlier autobiographical me mories have been “wiped out” as the seizure
disorder progresses. Such  memory loss is not associated with traumatic circumstances and ap-
pears to occur randomly. Serial electroencepha lograms usually show abnormalities. Telemet-
ric electroencephalographic monitoring usually shows an association between the episodes of
amnesia and seizure activity. Dissociativ e and epileptic amnesias may coexist.
Catatonic stupor. Mutism in catatonic stupor may sugg est dissociative amnesia, but fail-
ure of recall is absent. Other catatonic symptoms  (e.g., rigidity, post uring, negativism) are
usually present.
Factitious disorder and malingering. There is no test, battery of tests, or set of procedures
that invariably distinguishes dissociative am nesia from feigned amnesia. Individuals with
factitious disorder or malingering have been noted to continue their deception even during
hypnotic or barbiturate-facilitated interviews. Feigned amnesia is more common in individ-
uals with 1) acute, florid dissociative amnesia; 2) financial, sexual, or legal problems; or 3) a
wish to escape stressful circumstances. True amnesia can be associated with those same cir-
cumstances. Many individuals who malinger confess spontane ously or when confronted. 
302 Dissociative Disorders
Normal and age-related changes in memory. Memory decrements in major and mild
neurocognitive disorders differ from those of  dissociative amnesia, which are usually as-
sociated with stressful events and are more specific, extensive, and/or complex.
Comorbidity
As dissociative amnesia begins  to remit, a wide variety of  affective phenomena may sur-
face: dysphoria, grief, rage, shame, guilt, psychological conf lict and turmoil, and suicidal
and homicidal ideation, impulses, and acts. These individuals may have symptoms that
then meet diagnostic criteria  for persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia); major de-
pressive disorder; other specified or unspec ified depressive disord er; adjustment disor-
der, with depressed mood; or adjustment disorder, with mixed disturbance of emotions
and conduct. Many individuals with dissociative amnesia develop PTSD at some point
during their life, especially when the traumatic antecedent s of their amnesia are brought
into conscious awareness. 
Many individuals with dissociative amnesia have symptoms that meet diagnostic cri-
teria for a comorbid somatic symptom or related disorder (and vice versa), including so-
matic symptom disorder and conversion di sorder (functional neurological symptom
disorder). Many individuals with dissociative  amnesia have symptoms  that meet diagnos-
tic criteria for a personality disorder, especially dependent, avoidant, and borderline. 
Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 300.6 (F48.1)
A. The presence of persistent or recurrent experiences of depersonalization, derealiza-
tion, or both:
1.Depersonalization:  Experiences of unreality, detachment, or being an outside ob-
server with respect to one’s thoughts, feelings, sensations, body, or actions (e.g.,
perceptual alterations, distorted sense of time, unreal or absent self, emotional and/
or physical numbing).
2.Derealization:  Experiences of unreality or detachment with respect to surround-
ings (e.g., individuals or objects are ex perienced as unreal, dreamlike, foggy, life-
less, or visually distorted).
B. During the depersonalization or derealization experiences, reality testing remains intact.
C. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, medication) or another medical condition (e.g., seizures).
E. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder, such as schizo-
phrenia, panic disorder, major depressive di sorder, acute stress disorder, posttrau-
matic stress disorder, or another dissociative disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of depe rsonalization/derealization diso rder are persistent or recur-
rent episodes of depersonalization, derealization, or both. Episodes of depersonalization
are characterized by a feeling of unreality or detachment from, or unfamiliarity with, one’s
whole self or from aspects of the self (Cri terion A1). The indivi dual may feel detached
from his or her entire being (e.g., “I am no on e,” “I have no self”). He or she may also feel
subjectively detached from aspects of the self , including feelings (e.g., hypoemotionality:
Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder 303
“I know I have feelings but I don’t feel them”), thoughts (e.g., “My thoughts don’t feel like
my own,” “head filled with cotton ”), whole body or body parts, or sensations (e.g., touch,
proprioception, hunger, thirst, libido). There may also be a diminished sense of agency
(e.g., feeling robotic, like an automaton; lacking control of one’s speech or movements).
The depersonalization experience can sometimes be one of a split self, with one part ob-
serving and one participating, known as an “o ut-of-body experience” in its most extreme
form. The unitary symptom of “depersonalization” consists of several symptom factors:
anomalous body experiences (i.e., unreality of  the self and perceptual alterations); emo-
tional or physical numbing; an d temporal distortions with anomalous subjective recall. 
Episodes of derealization are characterize d by a feeling of unreality or detachment
from, or unfamiliarity with, the world, be it individuals, inanimate objects, or all surround-
ings (Criterion A2). The individual may feel as if he or she were in a fog, dream, or bubble, or
as if there were a veil or a glass wall between the individual and world around. Surround-
ings may be experienced as artificial, colorles s, or lifeless. Derealization is commonly ac-
companied by subjective visual distortions, su ch as blurriness, heig htened acuity, widened
or narrowed visual field, two-dimensionalit y or flatness, exaggerated three-dimensional-
ity, or altered distance or size of objects (i.e ., macropsia or micropsia). Auditory distortions
can also occur, whereby voices or sounds ar e muted or heightened. In addition, Criterion
C requires the presence of clinically signific ant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functionin g, and Criteria D and E describe exclusionary
diagnoses. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with depersonalization/derealizat ion disorder may have difficulty describ-
ing their symptoms and may think they are “crazy” or “going crazy”. Another common
experience is the fear of irreversible brai n damage. A commonly associated symptom is a
subjectively altered sense of time (i.e., too fast  or too slow), as well as a subjective difficulty
in vividly recalling past memories and owning  them as personal and emotional. Vague so-
matic symptoms, such as head fullness, ting ling, or lightheadedne ss, are not uncommon.
Individuals may suffer extreme rumination or  obsessional preoccupation (e.g., constantly
obsessing about whether they really exist, or checking their perc eptions to determine
whether they appear real). Varying degrees of  anxiety and depression are also common as-
sociated features. Individuals with the disord er have been found to have physiological
hyporeactivity to emotional stimuli. Neural substrates of interest include the hypotha-
lamic-pituitary-adrenocortical ax is, inferior parietal lobule, and prefrontal cortical-limbic
circuits.
Prevalence
Transient depersonalization/derealization sy mptoms lasting hours to days are common
in the general population. The 12-month prev alence of depersonalization/derealization
disorder is thought to be markedly less than  for transient symptoms, although precise es-
timates for the disorder are unavailable. In general, approximately one-half of all adults
have experienced at least one lifetime episode of depersonalization/derealization. How-
ever, symptomatology that meets full criter ia for depersonalization/derealization disor-
der is markedly less common than transient sy mptoms. Lifetime prevalence in U.S. and
non-U.S. countries is approximat ely 2% (range of 0.8% to 2. 8%). The gender ratio for the
disorder is 1:1.
Development and Course
The mean age at onset of depersonalization/derealization disorder is 16 years, although the
disorder can start in early or middle childhood; a minority cannot recall ever not having had
304 Dissociative Disorders
the symptoms. Less than 20% of individuals experience onset after age 20 years and only
5% after age 25 years. Onset in the fourth decade of life or later is highly unusual. Onset can
range from extremely sudden to gradual. Du ration of depersonalization/derealization
disorder episodes can vary greatly, from brief (hours or days) to prolonged (weeks,
months, or years). Given the rari ty of disorder onset after age 40 years, in such cases the in-
dividual should be examined more closely fo r underlying medical conditions (e.g., brain
lesions, seizure disorders, sl eep apnea). The course of the disorder is often persistent.
About one-third of cases involve discrete episodes; another third, continuous symptoms
from the start; and still another third, an initially episodic co urse that even tually becomes
continuous. 
While in some individuals the intensity of symptoms can wax and wane considerably,
others report an unwavering level of intensity that in extreme cases can be constantly pres-
ent for years or decades. Internal and extern al factors that affect  symptom intensity vary
between individuals, yet some typical pattern s are reported. Exacerbations can be trig-
gered by stress, worsening mood or anxiety symptoms, novel or over stimulating settings,
and physical factors such as lighting or lack of sleep. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Individuals with depersonalization/ derealization disorder are charac-
terized by harm-avoidant temperament, imma ture defenses, and both disconnection and
overconnection schemata. Imma ture defenses such as idea lization/devaluation, projec-
tion and acting out result in deni al of reality and poor adaptation. Cognitive disconnection
schemata  reflect defectiveness and emotional inhibi tion and subsume themes of abuse, ne-
glect, and deprivation. Overconnection schemata  involve impaired autonomy with themes
of dependency, vulnerability, and incompetence.
Environmental. There is a clear association between the disorder and childhood interper-
sonal traumas in a substantial portion of individu als, although this association is not as prev-
alent or as extreme in the nature of the trau mas as in other dissociative disorders, such as
dissociative identity disorder. In particular, emotional abuse and emotional neglect have been
most strongly and consistently associated with  the disorder. Other st ressors can include phys-
ical abuse; witnessing domestic  violence; growing up with a se riously impaired, mentally ill
parent; or unexpected de ath or suicide of a family member or close friend. Sexual abuse is a
much less common antecedent but can be encountered. The most common proximal precipi-
tants of the disorder are severe stress (interpersonal, financ ial, occupational), depression, anx-
iety (particularly panic attacks), and illicit drug  use. Symptoms may be specifically induced by
substances such as tetrahydrocannabinol, ha llucinogens, ketamine, MDMA (3,4-methylene-
dioxymethamphetamine; “ecstasy ”) and salvia. Marijuana use may precipitate new-onset
panic attacks and depersonalization/derealization symptoms simultaneously.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Volitionally induced experiences of depersonalization/dereali zation can be a part of med-
itative practices that are prevalent in many religions and cult ures and should not be diag-
nosed as a disorder. However, there are in dividuals who initially induce these states
intentionally but over time lose control over  them and may develop a fear and aversion for
related practices. 
Functional Consequences of 
Depersonalization/De realization Disorder
Symptoms of depersonalization/derealization disorder are highly distressing and are as-
sociated with major morbidity. The affectivel y flattened and robotic demeanor that these
Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder 305
individuals often demonstrate may appear incongruent with the extreme emotional pain
reported by those with the disorder. Impairment is often experienced in both interpersonal
and occupational spheres, largel y due to the hypoemotionality with others, subjective diffi-
culty in focusing and retaining information, and a general sense of disconnectedness from
life. 
Differential Diagnosis
Illness anxiety disorder. Although individuals with depersonalization/derealization dis-
order can present with vague somatic complaints as well as fears of permanent brain dam-
age, the diagnosis of depersonalization/derealization disorder is characterized by the
presence of a constellation of typical depersonalization/derealization symptoms and the ab-
sence of other manifestations  of illness anxiety disorder. 
Major depressive disorder. Feelings of numbness, deadne ss, apathy, and being in a
dream are not uncommon in major depressive  episodes. However, in depersonalization/
derealization disorder, such symptoms are a ssociated with further symptoms of the dis-
order. If the depersonalization/derealization clearly precedes the onset of a major depres-
sive episode or clearly continues after its resolution, the diagnosis of depersonalization/
derealization disorder applies. 
Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Some individuals with depersonalization/dereal-
ization disorder can become obsessively preo ccupied with their subjective experience or
develop rituals checking on the status of their symptoms. However, other symptoms of
obsessive-compulsive disorder  unrelated to depersonali zation/derealization are not
present. 
Other dissociative disorders. In order to diagnose depersonalization/derealization
disorder, the symptoms should not occur in th e context of another dissociative disorder,
such as dissociative identity disorder. Differentiation from dissociative amnesia and con-
version disorder (functional neurological sy mptom disorder) is simpler, as the symptoms
of these disorders do not overlap with those of depersonalization/derealization disorder. 
Anxiety disorders. Depersonalization/derealization is one of the symptoms of panic at-
tacks, increasingly common as panic attack severity increases. Therefore, depersonal-
ization/derealization disorder should not be diagnosed when the symptoms occur only
during panic attacks that are part of panic disorder, social anxiety disorder, or specific
phobia. In addition, it is not uncommon for depersonalization/derealization symptoms
to first begin in the context of new-onset pani c attacks or as panic disorder progresses and
worsens. In such presentations, the diagno sis of depersonalization/ derealization disorder
can be made if 1) the depersonalization/de realization component of  the presentation is
very prominent from the start, clearly exceed ing in duration and intensity the occurrence
of actual panic attacks; or 2) the depersona lization/derealization continues after panic dis-
order has remitted or has be en successfully treated. 
Psychotic disorders. The presence of intact reality testing specifically regarding the
depersonalization/derealization symptoms is essential to differentiating depersonal-
ization/derealization disord er from psychotic disorder s. Rarely, positive-symptom
schizophrenia can pose a diagnostic challenge when nihilistic delusions are present. For
example, an individual may complain that he or she is dead or the world is not real; this
could be either a subjective experience that the individual knows is not true or a delusional
conviction.
Substance/medication-induced disorders. Depersonalization/dere alization associated
with the physiological effects of substances duri ng acute intoxication or withdrawal is not
diagnosed as depersonalization/derealizatio n disorder. The most common precipitating
substances are the illicit drugs marijuana, hallucinogens, ketamine, ecstasy, and salvia. In
306 Dissociative Disorders
about 15% of all cases of depersonalization/derealization disorder, the symptoms are pre-
cipitated by ingestion of such substances. If the symptoms persist for some time in the ab-
sence of any further substance or medication  use, the diagnosis of depersonalization/
derealization disorder applies. This diagnosis is usually easy to establish since the vast ma-
jority of individuals with this presentation become highly phobic and aversive to the trig-
gering substance and do not use it again.
Mental disorders due to another medical condition. Features such as onset after age
40 years or the presence of atypical symptoms  and course in any individual suggest the
possibility of an underlying medical condition. In such cases, it is essential to conduct a
thorough medical and neurological evaluation, which may include standard laboratory
studies, viral titers, an electroencephalogram, ve stibular testing, visual testing, sleep stud-
ies, and/or brain imaging. When the suspicion of an underlying seizure disorder proves
difficult to confirm, an ambulatory electr oencephalogram may be indicated; although
temporal lobe epilepsy is most commonly implicated, pariet al and frontal lobe epilepsy
may also be associated.
Comorbidity
In a convenience sample of adults recruite d for a number of depersonalization research
studies, lifetime comorbidities were high for unipolar depressive disorder and for any
anxiety disorder, with a signific ant proportion of the sample having both disorders. Comor-
bidity with posttraumatic stress disorder was low. The three most commonly co-occurring
personality disorders were avoidant, borderline, and ob sessive-compulsive.
Other Specified Dissociative Disorder
300.15 (F44.89)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a dissociative
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the dissociative disorders diagnostic class. The other specified dissocia-
tive disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate
the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific disso-
ciative disorder. This is done by recording “other specified dissociative disorder” followed
by the specific reason (e.g., “dissociative trance”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1.Chronic and recurrent syndromes of  mixed dissociative symptoms:  This cate-
gory includes identity disturbance associated with less-than-marked discontinuities in
sense of self and agency, or alterations of identity or episodes of possession in an in-
dividual who reports no dissociative amnesia. 
2.Identity disturbance due to prolong ed and intense coercive persuasion:  Individ-
uals who have been subjected to intense coercive persuasion (e.g., brainwashing,
thought reform, indoctrination while captive, torture, long-term political imprisonment,
recruitment by sects/cults or by terror organizations) may present with prolonged
changes in, or conscious questioning of, their identity.
3.Acute dissociative reactions to stressful events:  This category is for acute, tran-
sient conditions that typically last less than 1 month, and sometimes only a few hours
or days. These conditions are characterized by constriction of consciousness; deper-
sonalization; derealization; perceptual disturbances (e.g., time slowing, macropsia);
Unspecified Dissociative Disorder 307
micro-amnesias; transient stupor; and/or altera tions in sensory-motor functioning (e.g.,
analgesia, paralysis).
4.Dissociative trance:  This condition is characterized by an acute narrowing or com-
plete loss of awareness of immediate surroundings that manifests as profound unre-
sponsiveness or insensitivity to environmental stimuli. The unresponsiveness may be
accompanied by minor stereotyped behaviors (e.g., finger movements) of which the in-
dividual is unaware and/or that he or she cannot control, as well as transient paralysis
or loss of consciousness. The dissociative trance is not a normal part of a broadly ac-
cepted collective cultural or religious practice.
Unspecified Dissociative Disorder
300.15 (F44.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a dissociative
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the dissociative disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified dissociative
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the rea-
son that the criteria are not met for a specific dissociative disorder, and includes presen-
tations for which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g.,
in emergency room settings).
This page intentionally left blank 