355Elimination
 Disorders
Elimination disorders  all involve the inappropriate elimination of urine or feces
and are usually first diagnosed in childhood or adolescence. This group of disorders in-
cludes enuresis,  the repeated voiding of urine into inappropriate places, and encopresis, the
repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places. Subtypes are provided to differentiate
nocturnal from diurnal (i.e., during waking hours) voiding for enuresis and the presence or
absence of constipation and ove rflow incontinence for encopresis. Although there are min-
imum age requirements for diagnosis of both disorders, these are based on developmental
age and not solely on chronological age. Both  disorders may be volun tary or involuntary.
Although these disorder s typically occur separa tely, co-occurrence may also be observed. 
Enuresis
Diagnostic Criteria 307.6 (F98.0)
A. Repeated voiding of urine into bed or clothes, whether involuntary or intentional.
B. The behavior is clinically significant as manifested by either a frequency of at least twice a
week for at least 3 consecutive months or the presence of clinically significant distress or
impairment in social, academic (occupational), or other important areas of functioning.
C. Chronological age is at least 5 years (or equivalent developmental level).
D. The behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a di-
uretic, an antipsychotic medication) or another medical condition (e.g., diabetes, spina
bifida, a seizure disorder).
Specify whether:
Nocturnal only: Passage of urine only during nighttime sleep.
Diurnal only: Passage of urine during waking hours.
Nocturnal and diurnal:  A combination of the two subtypes above.
Subtypes
The nocturnal-only subtype of enuresis, sometimes referred to as monosymptomatic enure-
sis, is the most common subtype and involves incontinence only during nighttime sleep,
typically during the fi rst one-third of the night. The di urnal-only subtype occurs in the
absence of nocturnal enuresis and may be referred to simply as urinary incontinence.  Indi-
viduals with this subtype can be divided in to two groups. Individu als with “urge incon-
tinence” have sudden urge symptoms and de trusor instability, whereas individuals with
“voiding postponement” consciously defer micturition urges until incontinence results.
The nocturnal-and-diurnal subtype is also known as nonmonosymptomatic enuresis.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of enuresis  is repeated voiding of urine during the day or at night into
bed or clothes (Criterion A). Most often the voiding is involuntary, bu t occasionally it may
356 Elimination Disorders
be intentional. To qualify for a diagnosis of  enuresis, the voiding of urine must occur at
least twice a week for at least 3 consecutive months or must cause clinically significant dis-
tress or impairment in social, academic (occu pational), or other im portant areas of func-
tioning (Criterion B). The indi vidual must have reached an age at which continence is
expected (i.e., a chronological age of at leas t 5 years or, for childre n with developmental
delays, a mental age of at least 5 years) (Cri terion C). The urinary incontinence is not at-
tributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a diuretic, an antipsychotic med-
ication) or another medical co ndition (e.g., diabetes, spina bifida, a seizure disorder)
(Criterion D).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
During nocturnal enuresis, occasionally the voiding takes place during rapid eye movement
(REM) sleep, and the child may recall a dream that involved the act of urinating. During day-
time (diurnal) enuresis, the child defers voiding until incontinence occurs, sometimes because
of a reluctance to use the toilet as a result of social anxiety or  a preoccupation with school or
play activity. The enuretic event most commonly occurs in the early afternoon on school days
and may be associated with symptoms of disr uptive behavior. The enuresis commonly per-
sists after appropriate treatment of an associat ed infection. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of enuresis is 5%–10% am ong 5-year-olds, 3%–5%  among 10-year-olds,
and around 1% among individuals 15 years or older.
Development and Course
Two types of course of enuresis have been de scribed: a “primary” type, in which the indi-
vidual has never established urinary continence, and a “secondary” type, in which the dis-
turbance develops after a period of establis hed urinary continence. There are no differences
in prevalence of comorbid me ntal disorders between the two types. By definition, primary
enuresis begins at age 5 years. The most co mmon time for the onset of secondary enuresis
is between ages 5 and 8 years, but it may occur at any time. After age 5 years, the rate of spon-
taneous remission is 5%–10% per year. Most ch ildren with the disord er become continent
by adolescence, but in approximately 1% of cases the disorder continues into adulthood.
Diurnal enuresis is uncommon after age 9 year s. While occasional diurnal incontinence is
not uncommon in middle childhood, it is substantially more common in those who also
have persistent nocturnal enures is. When enuresis persists in to late childhood or adoles-
cence, the frequency of incontinence may in crease, whereas continence in early childhood
is usually associated with a dec lining frequency of wet nights.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. A number of predisposing factors for enuresis have been suggested, in-
cluding delayed or lax toilet training and psychosocial stress.
Genetic and physiological. Enuresis has been associated with delays in the develop-
ment of normal circadian rhyt hms of urine production, with resulting nocturnal polyuria
or abnormalities of central v asopressin receptor sensitivity, and reduced functional blad-
der capacities with bladder hyperreactivity (unstable bladder syndrome). Nocturnal en-
uresis is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Heritability has been shown in family, twin,
and segregation analyses. Risk for childhood nocturnal enuresis is approximately 3.6 times
higher in offspring of enuretic mothers and 10.1 times higher  in the presence of paternal
urinary incontinence. The risk magnitudes fo r nocturnal enuresis and diurnal incontinence
are similar.
Encopresis 357
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
Enuresis has been reported in a variety of Eu ropean, African, and Asian countries as well
as in the United States. At a national level,  prevalence rates are remarkably similar, and
there is great similarity in the developmenta l trajectories found in different countries.
There are very high rates of enuresis in orphanages and other residential institutions,
likely related to the mode and environment in which toilet training occurs. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Nocturnal enuresis is more common in males. Diurnal incontinence is more common in fe-
males. The relative risk of having a child who develops enuresis is greater for previously
enuretic fathers than for pr eviously enuretic mothers. 
Functional Consequences of Enuresis
The amount of impairment associated with enur esis is a function of the limitation on the
child’s social activities (e.g., ineligibility fo r sleep-away camp) or its effect on the child’s
self-esteem, the degree of social ostracism by peers, and the anger, punishment, and rejec-
tion on the part of caregivers.
Differential Diagnosis
Neurogenic bladder or another medical condition. The diagnosis of enuresis is not made
in the presence of a neurogenic bladder or an other medical condition that causes polyuria or
urgency (e.g., untreated diabetes mellitus or diabetes insipidus) or during an acute urinary
tract infection. However, a diagnosis is compat ible with such conditions if urinary inconti-
nence was regularly present prior to the development of another me dical condition or if it per-
sists after the institution of appropriate treatment of the medical condition.
Medication side effects. Enuresis may occur during treatment with antipsychotic med-
ications, diuretics, or other medications that may induce incontinence. In this case, the di-
agnosis should not be made in isolation but may be noted as a medication side effect.
However, a diagnosis of enuresis may be made if urinary incontinence was regularly pres-
ent prior to treatment with the medication.
Comorbidity
Although most children with enuresis do not have a comorbid mental disorder, the prevalence
of comorbid behavioral symptoms is higher in children with enuresis than in children without
enuresis. Developmental delays, including speech, language, learning, and motor skills
delays, are also present in a portion of childr en with enuresis. Encopresis, sleepwalking, and
sleep terror disorder may be present. Urinar y tract infections are more common in children
with enuresis, especially the diurnal subtype, than in those who are continent.
Encopresis
Diagnostic Criteria 307.7 (F98.1)
A. Repeated passage of feces into inappropriate places (e.g., clothing, floor), whether in-
voluntary or intentional.
B. At least one such event occurs each month for at least 3 months.
C. Chronological age is at least 4 years (or equivalent developmental level).
D. The behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., laxa-
tives) or another medical condition except through a mechanism involving constipation.
358 Elimination Disorders
Specify whether:
With constipation and overflow incontinence:  There is evidence of constipation on
physical examination or by history.
Without constipation and overflow incontinence:  There is no evidence of constipa-
tion on physical examination or by history.
Subtypes
Feces in the with constipation and overflow incontinence subtype are characteristically
(but not invariably) poorly fo rmed, and leakage can be infr equent to cont inuous, occur-
ring mostly during the day and rarely during sleep. Only part of the feces is passed during
toileting, and the incontinence resolves after treatment of the constipation.
In the without constipation and overflow inco ntinence subtype, feces are likely to be of
normal form and consistency, and soiling is intermittent. Feces may be deposited in a
prominent location. This is usually associated  with the presence of  oppositional defiant
disorder or conduct disorder or may be th e consequence of anal masturbation. Soiling
without constipation appears to be less common than soiling with constipation.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of encopresis is repeated passage of feces into in appropriate places (e.g.,
clothing or floor) (Criterion A). Most often the passage is involuntary but occasionally may be
intentional. The event must occur at least once a month for at least 3 months (Criterion B), and
the chronological age of the child must be at least 4 years (or for children with developmental
delays, the mental age must be at least 4 years)  (Criterion C). The fecal incontinence must not
be exclusively attributable to the physiological ef fects of a substance (e.g., laxatives) or another
medical condition except thr ough a mechanism involving constipation (Criterion D).
When the passage of feces is involuntary rath er than intentional, it is often related to
constipation, impaction, and retention with subsequent overflow. The constipation may
develop for psychological reasons (e.g., anxiet y about defecating in a particular place, a
more general pattern of anxious or oppositional behavior), leading to avoidance of defeca-
tion. Physiological predispositi ons to constipation include ineffectual straining or paradox-
ical defecation dynamics, with contraction rath er than relaxation of the external sphincter
or pelvic floor during straining for defecati on. Dehydration associated with a febrile ill-
ness, hypothyroidism, or a medication side ef fect can also induce constipation. Once con-
stipation has developed, it may be complicated by an anal fissure, painful defecation, and
further fecal retention. The con sistency of the stool may vary. In some individuals the stool
may be of normal or near-normal consistency. In other individuals—such as those with
overflow incontinence secondary to  fecal retention—it may be liquid.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The child with encopresis often feels ashame d and may wish to avoid situations (e.g.,
camp, school) that might lead to embarrassment. The amount of impairment is a function
of the effect on the child's self-esteem, the degree of social ostracism by peers, and the an-
ger, punishment, and rejection on the part of  caregivers. Smearing feces may be deliberate
or accidental, resulting from the child’s attempt to clean or hide feces that were passed in-
voluntarily. When the incontinence is clearly deliberate, features of  oppositional defiant
disorder or conduct disorder may also be present. Many children with encopresis and
chronic constipation also have enuresis symp toms and may have associated urinary reflux
in the bladder or ureters that may lead to  chronic urinary infections, the symptoms of
which may remit with treatment of the constipation.
Other Specified Elimination Disorder 359
Prevalence
It is estimated that approximately 1% of 5-year-olds have encopresis, and the disorder is
more common in males than in females.
Development and Course
Encopresis is not diagnosed until a child has re ached a chronological ag e of at least 4 years
(or for children with developmental delays, a mental age of at least 4 years). Inadequate,
inconsistent toilet training and psychosocial st ress (e.g., entering school, the birth of a sib-
ling) may be predisposing factors. Two types of  course have been described: a “primary”
type, in which the individual has never established fecal continence, and a “secondary”
type, in which the disturbance develops after a period of established fecal continence. En-
copresis can persist, with interm ittent exacerbations, for years.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Painful defecation can lead to co nstipation and a cycle of with-
holding behaviors that make encopresis more likely. Use of some medications (e.g., anti-
convulsants, cough suppressants) may increase constipation and make encopresis more
likely.
Diagnostic Markers
In addition to physical examination, gastrointestinal imaging (e.g., abdominal radiograph)
may be informative to assess retained stool an d gas in the colon. Additional tests, such as
barium enema and anorectal ma nography, may be used to help exclude other medical
conditions, such as Hirschsprung’s disease.
Differential Diagnosis
A diagnosis of encopresis in the presence of  another medical condition is appropriate only
if the mechanism involves constipation that cannot be explained by other medical condi-
tions. Fecal incontinence related to other me dical conditions (e.g., chronic diarrhea, spina
bifida, anal stenosis) would not warrant a DSM-5 diagnosis of encopresis.
Comorbidity
Urinary tract infections can be comorbid with encopresis and are more common in females.
Other Specified Elimination Disorder
 
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of an elimination
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the elimination disorders di agnostic class. The other specified elimination
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the
specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific elimination
disorder. This is done by recording “other s pecified elimination disorder” followed by the
specific reason (e.g., “low-frequency enuresis”).
Coding note:  Code 788.39 (N39.498)  for other specified elimi nation disorder with urinary
symptoms; 787.60 (R15.9)  for other specified elimination disorder with fecal symptoms.
360 Elimination Disorders
Unspecified Elimination Disorder
 
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of an elimination
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the elimination disorders di agnostic class. The unspecified elimination dis-
order category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not  to specify the reason
that the criteria are not met for a specific elimination disorder, and includes presentations
in which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emer-
gency room settings).
Coding note: Code 788.30 (R32) for unspecified elimination disorder with urinary symp-
toms; 787.60 (R15.9)  for unspecified elimination disorder with fecal symptoms.