329Feeding and
Eating Disorders
Feeding and eating  disorders are characterized by a persistent disturbance of eat-
ing or eating-related behavior that results in the altered consumption or absorption of
food and that significantly impairs physical he alth or psychosocial functioning. Diagnos-
tic criteria are provid ed for pica, rumination disorder, avoidant/restrictive food intake
disorder, anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating disorder. 
The diagnostic criteria for rumination diso rder, avoidant/restrictive food intake dis-
order, anorexia nervosa,  bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating  disorder result in a classifica-
tion scheme that is mutually ex clusive, so that during a sing le episode, only one of these
diagnoses can be assigned. The rationale for this approach is that, despite a number of
common psychological and behavioral features , the disorders differ substantially in clin-
ical course, outcome, and treatment needs. A diagnosis of pica, however, may be assigned
in the presence of any other feeding and eating disorder.
Some individuals with disorders described in  this chapter report eating-related symp-
toms resembling those typically endorsed by individuals with substance use disorders,
such as craving and patterns of compulsive use. This resemblance may reflect the involve-
ment of the same neural systems, including th ose implicated in regulatory self-control and
reward, in both groups of disorders. Howeve r, the relative contributions of shared and
distinct factors in the development and perp etuation of eating an d substance use disor-
ders remain insuffic iently understood.
Finally, obesity is not included in DSM-5 as  a mental disorder. Obesity (excess body fat)
results from the long-term excess of energy in take relative to energy expenditure. A range
of genetic, physiological, behavioral, and en vironmental factors that vary across individ-
uals contributes to the development of obesit y; thus, obesity is not considered a mental
disorder. However, there are ro bust associations between ob esity and a number of mental
disorders (e.g., binge-eating disorder, depre ssive and bipolar disorders, schizophrenia).
The side effects of some psychotropic medica tions contribute importantly to the develop-
ment of obesity, and obesity may be a risk fa ctor for the development of some mental dis-
orders (e.g., depr essive disorders).
Pica
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Persistent eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances over a period of at least 1 month.
B. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances is inappropriate to the developmental
level of the individual. 
C. The eating behavior is not part of a culturally  supported or socially normative practice.
D. If the eating behavior occurs in the context of another mental disorder (e.g., intellectual
disability [intellectual developmental disorder], autism spectrum disorder, schizophre-
nia) or medical condition (including pregnancy), it is sufficiently severe to warrant ad-
ditional clinical attention.
330 Feeding and Eating Disorders
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code for pica is 307.52 and is used for children or adults.
The ICD-10-CM codes for pica are (F98.3)  in children and (F50.8)  in adults.
Specify if:
In remission:  After full criteria for pica were previously met, the criteria have not been
met for a sustained period of time.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of pica is the eating of on e or more nonnutritive, nonfood substances on a
persistent basis over a period of at least 1 month (Criterion A) that is severe enough to warrant
clinical attention. Typical substances ingested te nd to vary with age and availability and might
include paper, soap, cloth, hair , string, wool, soil, chalk, talc um powder, paint, gum, metal,
pebbles, charcoal or coal, ash, clay, starch, or ice. The term nonfood  is included because the di-
agnosis of pica does not apply to ingestion of diet products that have minimal nutritional con-
tent. There is typically no aversion to food in general. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood
substances must be developmentally inappropriate (Criterion B)  and not part of a culturally
supported or socially normativ e practice (Criterion C). A minimum age of 2 years is suggested
for a pica diagnosis to exclude developmentally normal mouthing of objects by infants that re-
sults in ingestion. The eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances can be an associated feature
of other mental disorders (e.g., intellectual disability [intellectual developmental disorder],
autism spectrum disorder, schizo phrenia). If the eating behavior occurs exclusively in the con-
text of another mental disorder, a separate diagnosis of pica should be made only if the eating
behavior is sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention (Criterion D).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Although deficiencies in vitamins or minerals (e .g., zinc, iron) have been reported in some
instances, often no specific biological abnorm alities are found. In some cases, pica comes
to clinical attention only following general medical complications (e.g., mechanical bowel
problems; intestinal obstruction,  such as that resulting from  a bezoar; intestinal perfora-
tion; infections such as toxoplasmosis and toxoca riasis as a result of ingesting feces or dirt;
poisoning, such as by ingestion of lead-based paint).
Prevalence
The prevalence of pica is unclear. Among in dividuals with intellectual disability, the prev-
alence of pica appears to increase with the severity of the condition.
Development and Course
Onset of pica can occur in childhood, adolesce nce, or adulthood, although childhood onset
is most commonly reported. Pi ca can occur in otherwise normally developing children,
whereas in adults, it appears more likely to o ccur in the context of intellectual disability or
other mental disorders. The ea ting of nonnutritive, nonfood substances may also manifest
in pregnancy, when specific cravings (e.g., chalk or ice) might occur. The diagnosis of pica
during pregnancy is only appropriate if such  cravings lead to the ingestion of nonnutri-
tive, nonfood substances to the extent that th e eating of these substances poses potential
medical risks. The course of th e disorder can be protracted an d can result in medical emer-
gencies (e.g., intestinal obstruction, acute weight loss, poisoning). The disorder can poten-
tially be fatal depending on substances ingested.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Neglect, lack of supervision, and de velopmental delay can increase the
risk for this condition.
Pica 331
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In some populations, the eating of earth or other seemingly nonn utritive substances is believed
to be of spiritual, medicinal, or  other social value, or may be a culturally supported or socially
normative practice. Such  behavior does not warrant a di agnosis of pica (Criterion C).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Pica occurs in both males and females. It ca n occur in females during pregnancy; however,
little is known about the course of pica in the postpartum period. 
Diagnostic Markers
Abdominal flat plate radiography, ultrasound, and other scanning methods may reveal
obstructions related to pica. Blood tests and other laboratory tests can be used to ascertain
levels of poisoning or the nature of infection. 
Functional Consequences of Pica
Pica can significantly impair physical functioning,  but it is rarely the sole cause of impair-
ment in social functioning. Pica often occu rs with other disorders associated with im-
paired social functioning.
Differential Diagnosis
Eating of nonnutritive, nonfood substances may occur during the course of other mental
disorders (e.g., autism spectr um disorder, schizophrenia) an d in Kleine-Levin syndrome.
In any such instance, an additional diagnosis of pica should be given only if the eating be-
havior is sufficiently persistent and severe to warrant additional clinical attention.
Anorexia nervosa. Pica can usually be distinguished from the other feeding and eating
disorders by the consumption of  nonnutritive, nonfoo d substances. It is important to note,
however, that some presentations of anorexia nervosa include ingestion of nonnutritive,
nonfood substances, such as paper tissues, as a means of attempting to control appetite. In
such cases, when the eating of nonnutritive,  nonfood substances is primarily used as a
means of weight control, anorexia ne rvosa should be the primary diagnosis. 
Factitious disorder. Some individuals with factitious disorder may intentionally ingest
foreign objects as part of the pattern of fals ification of physical symptoms. In such in-
stances, there is an element of deception that is consistent with deliberate induction of in-
jury or disease. 
Nonsuicidal self-injury and nonsuicidal self -injury behaviors in personality disorders.
Some individuals may swallow potentially harm ful items (e.g., pins, needles, knives) in
the context of maladaptive be havior patterns associated with personality disorders or
nonsuicidal self-injury. 
Comorbidity
Disorders most commonly comorb id with pica are autism spectrum disorder and intellec-
tual disability (intellectual deve lopmental disorder), and, to a lesser degree, schizophrenia
and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Pica can be associated with trichotillomania (hair-
pulling disorder) and exco riation (skin-picking) disorder. In comorbid presentations, the
hair or skin is typically ingested. Pica can al so be associated with av oidant/restrictive food
intake disorder, particularly in individuals with a strong sensory component to their pre-
sentation. When an individual is known to  have pica, assessment should include con-
sideration of the possibility of gastrointestinal complications, poisoning, infection, and
nutritional deficiency. 
332 Feeding and Eating Disorders
Rumination Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 307.53 (F98.21)
A. Repeated regurgitation of food over a period of at least 1 month. Regurgitated food
may be re-chewed, re-swallowed, or spit out.
B. The repeated regurgitation is not attributable to an associated gastrointestinal or other
medical condition (e.g., gastroesophageal reflux, pyloric stenosis).
C. The eating disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of anorexia nervosa,
bulimia nervosa, binge-eating disorder, or avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder. 
D. If the symptoms occur in the context of another mental disorder (e.g., intellectual dis-
ability [intellectual developmental disorder ] or another neurodevelopmental disorder),
they are sufficiently severe to warrant additional clinical attention. 
Specify if:
In remission:  After full criteria for rumination disorder were previously met, the criteria
have not been met for a sustained period of time.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of rumina tion disorder is the repeated regurgitation of food occur-
ring after feeding or eating over a period of at least 1 month (Criterion A). Previously swal-
lowed food that may be partially digested is brought up into the mouth without apparent
nausea, involuntary retching, or disgust. The food may be re-chewed and then ejected
from the mouth or re-swallow ed. Regurgitation in ruminati on disorder should be fre-
quent, occurring at least several times per we ek, typically daily. The behavior is not better
explained by an associated gastrointestinal or other medical condition (e.g., gastroesoph-
ageal reflux, pyloric stenosis) (Criterion B) and does not occur exclusively during the
course of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge-eating disorder, or avoidant/restric-
tive food intake disorder (Criterion C). If the symptoms occur in the context of another
mental disorder (e.g., intellectual disability [intellectual developmen tal disorder], neuro-
developmental disorder), they must be suffici ently severe to warrant additional clinical
attention (Criterion D) and should represent a primary aspect of the individual’s presen-
tation requiring intervention. The disorder may be diagnosed across the life span, par-
ticularly in individuals who also have in tellectual disability. Many individuals with
rumination disorder can be dire ctly observed engaging in the behavior by the clinician. In
other instances diagnosis can be made on the basis of self-report or  corroborative informa-
tion from parents or caregivers. Individuals may describe the behavior as habitual or out-
side of their control.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Infants with rumination disorder display a characteristic position of straining and arching
the back with the head held back, making  sucking movements with their tongue. They
may give the impression of gaining satisfaction from the ac tivity. They ma y be irritable
and hungry between episodes of regurgitation.  Weight loss and failu re to make expected
weight gains are common features in infants with rumination disorder. Malnutrition may
occur despite the infant’s appa rent hunger and the ingestion of relatively large amounts of
food, particularly in severe cases, when regurgitation imme diately follows each feeding
episode and regurgitated food is expelled. Malnutrition might also occur in older children
and adults, particularly when the regurgitation is accompanied by restriction of intake.
Adolescents and adults may attempt to disgui se the regurgitation behavior by placing a
Rumination Disorder 333
hand over the mouth or coughing. Some will a void eating with others because of the ac-
knowledged social undesirability of the behavi or. This may extend to an avoidance of eat-
ing prior to social situations, such as work or school (e.g., avoidi ng breakfast because it
may be followed by regurgitation).
Prevalence
Prevalence data for rumination disorder ar e inconclusive, but the disorder is commonly
reported to be higher in certain groups, such as individuals with intellectual disability.
Development and Course
Onset of rumination disorder can occur in in fancy, childhood, adolescence, or adulthood.
The age at onset in infants is usually between ag es 3 and 12 months. In infants, the disorder
frequently remits spontaneously, but its course can be protract ed and can result in medical
emergencies (e.g., severe malnutrition). It can potentially be fatal, particularly in infancy.
Rumination disorder can have an episodic course or occur continuously until treated. In
infants, as well as in older individuals with intellectual disability (intellectual developmen-
tal disorder) or other neurodevelopmental diso rders, the regurgitation and rumination be-
havior appears to have a self-soothing or self-stimulating func tion, similar to that of other
repetitive motor behaviors such as head banging. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Psychosocial problems such as lack of stimulation, neglect, stressful life
situations, and problems in the parent-child relationship may be predisposing factors in
infants and young children.
Functional Consequences of Rumination Disorder
Malnutrition secondary to repeated regurgit ation may be associated with growth delay
and have a negative effect on development an d learning potential. Some older individuals
with rumination disorder deliberately restrict their food intake because of the social un-
desirability of regurgitation. They may therefore present with  weight loss or low weight.
In older children, adolescents, and adults, soci al functioning is more likely to be adversely
affected. 
Differential Diagnosis
Gastrointestinal conditions. It is important to differentiate regurgitation in rumination
disorder from other conditions characterized by gastroesophageal re flux or vomiting. Con-
ditions such as gastroparesis, pyloric stenosis, hiatal hernia, and Sandifer syndrome in in-
fants should be ruled out by appropriate physical examinations and laboratory tests.
Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Individuals with anorexia nervosa and bulimia
nervosa may also engage in regurgitation with subsequent spitting ou t of food as a means
of disposing of ingested calories be cause of concerns about weight gain. 
Comorbidity
Regurgitation with associated rumination can occur in the context of a concurrent medical
condition or another mental disorder (e.g., ge neralized anxiety disorder). When the regur-
gitation occurs in  this context, a diagnosis of ruminati on disorder is appropriate only when
the severity of the disturbance exceeds that routinely associated with such conditions or
disorders and warrants additional clinical attention.
334 Feeding and Eating Disorders
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 307.59 (F50.8)
A. An eating or feeding disturbance (e.g., apparent lack of interest in eating or food; avoid-
ance based on the sensory characteristics of food; concern about aversive conse-
quences of eating) as manifested by persistent failure to meet appropriate nutritional
and/or energy needs associated with one (or more) of the following:
1. Significant weight loss (or failure to achieve expected weight gain or faltering
growth in children).
2. Significant nutritional deficiency.
3. Dependence on enteral feeding or oral nutritional supplements.
4. Marked interference with psychosocial functioning.
B. The disturbance is not better explained by lack of available food or by an associated
culturally sanctioned practice.
C. The eating disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of anorexia ner-
vosa or bulimia nervosa, and there is no evidence of a disturbance in the way in which
one’s body weight or shape is experienced.
D. The eating disturbance is not attributable to a concurrent medical condition or not bet-
ter explained by another mental disorder. When the eating disturbance occurs in the
context of another condition or disorder, t he severity of the eating disturbance exceeds
that routinely associated with the condition or disorder and warrants additional clinical
attention.
Specify if:
In remission:  After full criteria for avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder were previ-
ously met, the criteria have not been met for a sustained period of time.
Diagnostic Features
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder replaces and extends the DSM-IV diagnosis of
feeding disorder of infancy or  early childhood. The main diagnostic feature of avoidant/
restrictive food intake disorder is avoidance or restriction of food intake (Criterion A)
manifested by clinically significant failure to  meet requirements for nutrition or insuffi-
cient energy intake through oral intake of food. One or more of the following key features
must be present: significant weight loss, si gnificant nutritional deficiency (or related
health impact), dependence on enteral feedin g or oral nutritional supplements, or marked
interference with psychosocial functioning.  The determination of whether weight loss is
significant (Criterion A1) is a clinical judgme nt; instead of losing weight, children and ad-
olescents who have not completed growth may not maintain weight or height increases
along their developmental trajectory.
Determination of significant nu tritional deficiency (Criterion A2) is also based on clin-
ical assessment (e.g., assessment of dietary intake, physical examination, and laboratory
testing), and related impact on physical health can be of a similar seve rity to that seen in
anorexia nervosa (e.g., hypother mia, bradycardia, anemia). In severe cases, particularly in
infants, malnutrition can be life threatening.  “Dependence” on enteral feeding or oral nu-
tritional supplements (Criterion A3) means that  supplementary feeding is required to sus-
tain adequate intake. Examples of individu als requiring supplementary feeding include
infants with failure to thrive who require na sogastric tube feeding, children with neuro-
developmental disorders who are dependent on  nutritionally complete supplements, and
individuals who rely on gastrostomy tube feeding or complete oral nutrition supplements
in the absence of an underlying medical condit ion. Inability to participate in normal social
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder 335
activities, such as eating with others, or to sustain relationsh ips as a result of the distur-
bance would indicate marked interference wi th psychosocial functioning (Criterion A4).
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder does not include avoidance or restriction of
food intake related to lack of availability of food or to cultural practices (e.g., religious fast-
ing or normal dieting) (Criterion B), nor does it include developmentally normal behaviors
(e.g., picky eating in toddlers, reduced intake in older adults). The disturbance is not better
explained by excessive concern about body weight  or shape (Criterion C) or by concurrent
medical factors or mental disorders (Criterion D). 
In some individuals, food av oidance or restriction may be based on the sensory char-
acteristics of qualities of fo od, such as extreme sensitivity to appearance, color, smell,
texture, temperature, or taste. Such behavior  has been described as  “restrictive eating,”
“selective eating,” “choosy eating,” “perseverant eating,” “chronic food refusal,” and
“food neophobia” and may manifest as refusal to  eat particular brands of foods or to tol-
erate the smell of food being eaten by others . Individuals with heightened sensory sensi-
tivities associated with autism  may show similar behaviors. 
Food avoidance or restriction may also repr esent a conditioned negative response as-
sociated with food intake following, or in an ticipation of, an aversive experience, such as
choking; a traumatic investigation, usually invo lving the gastrointestinal tract (e.g., esoph-
agoscopy); or repeated vomiting. The terms functional dysphagia and globus hystericus  have
also been used for such conditions. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
Several features may be associated with food avoidance or reduced food intake, including
a lack of interest in eating or food, leading to weight loss or faltering growth. Very young
infants may present as being too sleepy, distre ssed, or agitated to feed. Infants and young
children may not engage with the primary ca regiver during feeding or communicate hun-
ger in favor of other activities. In older child ren and adolescents, food  avoidance or restric-
tion may be associated with more generali zed emotional difficulties that do not meet
diagnostic criteria for an an xiety, depressive, or bipolar disorder, sometimes called “food
avoidance emotional disorder.” 
Development and Course
Food avoidance or restriction associated with in sufficient intake or lack of interest in eat-
ing most commonly develops in infancy or early childhood and may persist in adulthood.
Likewise, avoidance based on sensory characterist ics of food tends to arise in the first de-
cade of life but may persist into adulthood. Avoidance related to aversive consequences
can arise at any age. The scant literature re garding long-term outcomes suggests that food
avoidance or restriction based on sensory aspects is relatively stable and long-standing,
but when persisting into adulthood, such avoidance/restriction can be associated with rel-
atively normal functioning. There is currently insufficient evidence directly linking avoid-
ant/restrictive food intake disorder and subsequent onset of an eating disorder. 
Infants with avoidant/restrictive food intake  disorder may be irritable and difficult to
console during feeding, or ma y appear apathetic and withdrawn. In some instances, par-
ent-child interaction may contri bute to the infant’s feeding problem (e.g., presenting food
inappropriately, or interpreting the infant’s be havior as an act of aggression or rejection).
Inadequate nutritional intake may exacerbate the associated fe atures (e.g., irritability, de-
velopmental lags) and further contribute to f eeding difficulties. Associated factors include
infant temperament or developm ental impairments that reduce  an infant’s responsiveness
to feeding. Coexisting parental psychopathology, or child abus e or neglect, is suggested if
feeding and weight improve in response to ch anging caregivers. In infants, children, and
prepubertal adolescents, avoidant/restrictive food intake di sorder may be associated with
growth delay, and the resulting malnutrition  negatively affects development and learning
336 Feeding and Eating Disorders
potential. In older children, adolescents, an d adults, social functioning tends to be ad-
versely affected. Regardless of the age, fami ly function may be affected, with heightened
stress at mealtimes and in other feeding or ea ting contexts involving friends and relatives.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder  manifests more commonly in children than
in adults, and there may be a long delay betw een onset and clinical presentation. Triggers
for presentation vary considerably and includ e physical, social, and emotional difficulties.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Anxiety disorders, autism spectrum disorder, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, and attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder may in crease risk for avoidant or
restrictive feeding or eating behavi or characteristic of the disorder. 
Environmental. Environmental risk factors for avoida nt/restrictive f ood intake disor-
der include familial anxiety. Higher rates of  feeding disturbances may occur in children of
mothers with eating disorders. 
Genetic and physiological. History of gastrointestinal co nditions, gastroesophageal re-
flux disease, vomiting, and a range of othe r medical problems has been associated with
feeding and eating behaviors characteristic of  avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Presentations similar to avoidant/restrictive fo od intake disorder occur in various popu-
lations, including in the United States, Cana da, Australia, and Euro pe. Avoidant/restrictive
food intake disorder should not be diagnosed when avoidance of food intake is solely re-
lated to specific religious or cultural practices.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder is equally common in males and females in in-
fancy and early childhood, but avoidant/restric tive food intake di sorder comorbid with
autism spectrum disorder has a male predominance. Food avoidance or restriction related
to altered sensory sensitivities can occur in some physiological conditions, most notably
pregnancy, but is not usually extreme and does  not meet full criter ia for the disorder.
Diagnostic Markers
Diagnostic markers include malnutrition, low weight, growth delay, and the need for ar-
tificial nutrition in the absence of any clear medical condition other than poor intake.
Functional Consequences of Avoidant/Restrictive 
Food Intake Disorder
Associated developmental and fu nctional limitations include impairment of physical de-
velopment and social difficulties that can have a significant negative impact on family
function. 
Differential Diagnosis
Appetite loss preceding restricted intake is a nonspecific symptom that can accompany a
number of mental diagnoses. Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder can be diagnosed
concurrently with the disorders below if all criteria are met, and the eating disturbance re-
quires specific clinical attention. 
Other medical conditions (e.g., gastrointest inal disease, food allergies and intoler-
ances, occult malignancies). Restriction of food intake ma y occur in other medical condi-
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder 337
tions, especially those with on going symptoms such as vomiting, loss of appetite, nausea, ab-
dominal pain, or diarrhea. A diag nosis of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder requires
that the disturbance of intake is beyond that directly accounted for by physical symptoms con-
sistent with a medical condition; the eating d isturbance may also persis t after being triggered
by a medical condition and following resolution of the medical condition. 
Underlying medical or comorbid mental cond itions may complicate  feeding and eating.
Because older individuals, postsurgical pati ents, and individuals receiving chemotherapy
often lose their appetite, an additional diagno sis of avoidant/restric tive food intake dis-
order requires that the eating disturbance is a primary focus for intervention. 
Specific neurological/neuromuscular, structural, or congenital disorders and condi-
tions associated with feeding difficulties. Feeding difficulties are common in a number
of congenital and neurological conditions often related to problems with oral/esophageal/
pharyngeal structure and function, such as hy potonia of musculature, tongue protrusion,
and unsafe swallowing. Avoidant/restrictive food  intake disorder can be diagnosed in in-
dividuals with such presentations as long as all diagnostic criteria are met.
Reactive attachment disorder. Some degree of withdrawal is characteristic of reactive
attachment disorder and can lead to a distur bance in the caregiver-child relationship that
can affect feeding and the child’s intake. Avoi dant/restrictive food intake disorder should
be diagnosed concurrently only if all criter ia are met for both di sorders and the feeding
disturbance is a primary focus for intervention.
Autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with autism spectr um disorder often present with
rigid eating behaviors and heightened sensor y sensitivities. However, these features do
not always result in the level of impairment  that would be required for a diagnosis of
avoidant/restrictive food intake  disorder. Avoidant/restrictive  food intake disorder should
be diagnosed concurrently only if all criteria  are met for both disorders and when the eat-
ing disturbance requires  specific treatment.
Specific phobia, social anxiety disorder (social phobia), and other anxiety disorders.
Specific phobia, other type, specifies “situation s that may lead to choking or vomiting” and
can represent the primary trigge r for the fear, anxiety, or avoidance required for diagnosis.
Distinguishing specific phobia from avoidant/res trictive food intake disorder can be dif-
ficult when a fear of choking or vomiting h as resulted in food avoidance. Although avoid-
ance or restriction of food intake secondar y to a pronounced fear of choking or vomiting
can be conceptualized as specific phobia, in  situations when the eating problem becomes
the primary focus of clinical attention, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder becomes
the appropriate diagnosis. In social anxiety disorder, the individual  may present with a
fear of being observed by others while eating , which can also occur in avoidant/restrictive
food intake disorder. 
Anorexia nervosa. Restriction of energy intake relati ve to requirements  leading to sig-
nificantly low body weight is a core featur e of anorexia nervosa.  However, individuals
with anorexia nervosa also display a fear of ga ining weight or of becoming fat, or persis-
tent behavior that interferes with weight gain , as well as specific disturbances in relation to
perception and experience of their own body weight and shape. These features are not
present in avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, and the two disorders should not be
diagnosed concurrently. Differential diagnosis between avoidant/restrictive food intake
disorder and anorexia nervosa may be difficult,  especially in late childhood and early ad-
olescence, because these disorders may share a number of common symptoms (e.g., food
avoidance, low weight). Differential diagnosis is also potentially difficult in individuals
with anorex ia nervosa who deny any fear of fatness but nonetheless engage in persistent
behaviors that prevent weight gain and who do not recognize the medical seriousness of
their low weight—a presentation sometimes termed “non-fat phobic anorexia nervosa.”
Full consideration of symptoms, course, and fa mily history is advised, and diagnosis may
338 Feeding and Eating Disorders
be best made in the context of a clinical rela tionship over time. In some individuals, avoid-
ant/restrictive food intake disorder might precede the onset of anorexia nervosa.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder may
present with avoidance or restri ction of intake in relation to preoccupations with food or
ritualized eating behavior. Avoidant/restrictive  food intake disorder  should be diagnosed
concurrently only if all criteria are met for both disorders and when the aberrant eating is
a major aspect of the clinical presenta tion requiring specific intervention.
Major depressive disorder. In major depressive disorder, a ppetite might be affected to
such an extent that individuals present with significantly restricted food intake, usually in
relation to overall energy intake and often a ssociated with weight loss. Usually appetite
loss and related reduction of intake abate wi th resolution of mood problems. Avoidant/
restrictive food intake disorder should only be used concurrently if fu ll criteria are met for
both disorders and when the eating d isturbance requires specific treatment.
Schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Individuals with schizophrenia, delusional disor-
der, or other psychotic disorders may exhibit odd eating behaviors, avoidance of specific
foods because of delusional beliefs, or other ma nifestations of avoidant or restrictive in-
take. In some cases, delusional beliefs may contribute to a concern about negative conse-
quences of ingesting certain foods. Avoidant/r estrictive food intake disorder should be
used concurrently only if all criteria are me t for both disorders and when the eating dis-
turbance requires specific treatment.
Factitious disorder or factitious disorder imposed on another. Avoidant/restrictive
food intake disorder should be differentiated fr om factitious disorder or factitious disor-
der imposed on another. In orde r to assume the sick role, so me individuals with factitious
disorder may intentionally describe diets that  are much more restrictive than those they
are actually able to consume, as well as comp lications of such behavior, such as a need for
enteral feedings or nutritional supplements,  an inability to tolera te a normal range of
foods, and/or an inability to participate normally in age-a ppropriate situations involving
food. The presentation may be impressively dramatic and engaging, and the symptoms re-
ported inconsistently. In factitious disorder  imposed on another, the caregive r describes
symptoms consistent with avoidant/restric tive food intake di sorder and may induce
physical symptoms such as failure to gain weig ht. As with any diagno sis of factitious dis-
order imposed on another, the caregiver receives the diagnosis rather than the affected in-
dividual, and diagnosis should be made only on the basis of a careful, comprehensive
assessment of the affected individual, the caregiver, and their interaction. 
Comorbidity
The most commonly observed disorders comorb id with avoidant/restrictive food intake
disorder are anxiety disorders, obsessive- compulsive disorder, and neurodevelopmental
disorders (specifically autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disor-
der, and intellectual disability [int ellectual developm ental disorder]).
Anorexia Nervosa
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Restriction of energy intake relative to requirements, leading to a significantly low body
weight in the context of age, sex, developmental trajectory, and physical health.  Sig-
nificantly low weight  is defined as a weight that is less than minimally normal or, for
children and adolescents, less than that minimally expected.
B. Intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that interferes
with weight gain, even though at a significantly low weight.
Anorexia Nervosa 339
C. Disturbance in the way in which one’s body weight or shape is experienced, undue in-
fluence of body weight or shape on self-eval uation, or persistent lack of recognition of
the seriousness of the current low body weight.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code for anorexia nervosa is 307.1,  which is assigned re-
gardless of the subtype. The ICD-10-CM  code depends on the subtype (see below).
Specify whether:
(F50.01) Restricting type: During the last 3 months, the individual has not engaged in re-
current episodes of binge eating or purging behavior (i.e., self-induced vomiting or the mis-
use of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas). This subtype describes presentations in which
weight loss is accomplished primarily through dieting, fasting, and/or excessive exercise.
(F50.02) Binge-eating/purging type: During the last 3 months, the individual has en-
gaged in recurrent episodes of binge eat ing or purging behavior (i.e., self-induced
vomiting or the misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas).
Specify if:
In partial remission: After full criteria for anorexia ne rvosa were previously met, Cri-
terion A (low body weight) has not been met for a sustained period, but either Criterion
B (intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat or behavior that interferes with weight
gain) or Criterion C (disturbances in self-perception of weight and shape) is still met.
In full remission: After full criteria for anorexia ner vosa were previously met, none of
the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
Specify current severity:
The minimum level of severity is based, for adults, on current body mass index (BMI) (see
below) or, for children and adolescents, on BMI percentile. The ranges below are derived
from World Health Organization categories for thinness in adults; for children and adoles-
cents, corresponding BMI percentiles should be used. The level of severity may be in-
creased to reflect clinical symptoms, the degree of functional disability, and the need for
supervision.
Mild:  BMI ≥ 17 kg/m2 
Moderate: BMI 16–16.99 kg/m2 
Severe:  BMI 15–15.99 kg/m2 
Extreme:  BMI < 15 kg/m2
Subtypes
Most individuals with the binge-eating/purging type of anorexia nervosa who binge eat
also purge through self-induced vomiting or th e misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or enemas.
Some individuals with this subtype of anorexia nervosa do not binge eat but do regularly
purge after the consumption of small amounts of food. 
Crossover between the subtypes over the c ourse of the disorder is not uncommon;
therefore, subtype description should be used to describe current symptoms rather than
longitudinal course.
Diagnostic Features
There are three essential features of anorexia  nervosa: persistent en ergy intake restriction;
intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming  fat, or persistent behavior that interferes
with weight gain; and a disturbance in self-perceived weight or shape. The individual main-
tains a body weight that is below a minimally normal level for age, sex, developmental tra-
jectory, and physical health (Criterion A). In dividuals’ body weights frequently meet this
criterion following a significant weight loss, but among children and adolescents, there
may alternatively be failure to make expected weight gain or to maintain a normal devel-
opmental trajectory (i.e., while grow ing in height) instead of weight loss.
340 Feeding and Eating Disorders
Criterion A requires that the individual’s weight be significantly low (i.e., less than
minimally normal or, for children and adoles cents, less than that minimally expected).
Weight assessment can be challenging because normal weight range differs among indi-
viduals, and different thresholds have been published defining thinness or underweight
status. Body mass index (BMI; calculated as weight in kilograms/height in meters2) is a
useful measure to assess body weight for height. For adults, a BMI of 18.5 kg/m2 has been
employed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the World Health
Organization (WHO) as the lower limit of normal body we ight. Therefore, most adults with
a BMI greater than or  equal to 18.5 kg/m2 would not be considered to have a significantly
low body weight. On the other ha nd, a BMI of lower than 17.0 kg/m2 has been considered
by the WHO to indicate moderate or severe thinness; therefore, an individual with a BMI
less than 17.0 kg/m2 would likely be considered to have a significantly low weight. An
adult with a BMI between  17.0 and 18.5 kg/m2, or even above 18.5 kg/m2, might be consid-
ered to have a significantly low weight if clinical history or other physiological informa-
tion supports this judgment.
For children and adolescents, de termining a BMI-for-age percentile is useful (see, e.g.,
the CDC BMI percentile calculator for children and teenagers. As for adults, it is not pos-
sible to provide definitive standards for judgin g whether a child’s or an adolescent’s weight
is significantly low, and variations in deve lopmental trajectories among youth limit the
utility of simple numerical guidelines. The CD C has used a BMI-for-age below the 5th per-
centile as suggesting underweight; however,  children and adolesce nts with a BMI above
this benchmark may be judged to be significantly underweight in light of failure to main-
tain their expected growth trajectory. In su mmary, in determining whether Criterion A is
met, the clinician should consider available numerical guidelines, as well as the individual’s
body build, weight history, an d any physiological disturbances.
Individuals with this disorder typically display an intense fear of gaining weight or of
becoming fat (Criterion B). This intense fear of becoming fat is usually not alleviated by
weight loss. In fact, concern about weight gain  may increase even as weight falls. Younger
individuals with anorexia nervosa, as well as  some adults, may not recognize or acknowl-
edge a fear of weight gain. In the absence of  another explanation for the significantly low
weight, clinician inference drawn from collateral history, observatio nal data, physical and
laboratory findings, or longitudinal course eith er indicating a fear of weight gain or sup-
porting persistent behaviors that prevent it  may be used to es tablish Criterion B. 
The experience and significance of body weight and shape are distorted in these indi-
viduals (Criterion C). Some individuals feel globally overweight. Others realize that they
are thin but are still concerned th at certain body parts, partic ularly the abdomen, buttocks,
and thighs, are “too fat.” They may employ a variety of techniques to evaluate their body
size or weight, including frequent weighing, obsessive measuring of body parts, and per-
sistent use of a mirror to check for perceived areas of “fat.” The self-esteem of individuals
with anorexia nervosa is highly dependent on their perceptions of body shape and weight.
Weight loss is often viewed as an impressive ac hievement and a sign of extraordinary self-
discipline, whereas weight gain is perceived as an unacceptable failure of self-control. Al-
though some individuals with this disorder  may acknowledge being thin, they often do
not recognize the serious medical implic ations of their malnourished state. 
Often, the individual is brought to professional attention by family members after marked
weight loss (or failure to make expected weight gains) has occurred. If individuals seek help
on their own, it is usually because of dist ress over the somatic and psychological sequelae
of starvation. It is rare for an individual with anorexia nervosa to complain of weight loss
per se. In fact, individuals with anorexia nervos a frequently either lack insight into or deny
the problem. It is therefore often important to obtain information from family members or
other sources to evaluate the history of weight loss and other features of the illness.
Anorexia Nervosa 341
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The semi-starvation of anorex ia nervosa, and the purging behaviors sometimes associated
with it, can result in significant and potentially life-threatening medical conditions. The
nutritional compromise associated with this  disorder affects most  major organ systems
and can produce a variety of disturbances. Ph ysiological disturbances, including amenor-
rhea and vital sign abnormalities, are comm on. While most of the physiological distur-
bances associated with malnutrition are reversible with nutritiona l rehabilitation, some,
including loss of bone mineral density, are often not completely re versible. Behaviors such
as self-induced vomiting and misuse of laxa tives, diuretics, and enemas may cause a num-
ber of disturbances that lead to abnormal la boratory findings; howe ver, some individuals
with anorexia nervosa exhibit no laboratory abnormalities. 
When seriously underweight, ma ny individuals with anorex ia nervosa have depressive
signs and symptoms such as depressed mood, so cial withdrawal, irrita bility, insomnia, and
diminished interest in sex. Because these feat ures are also observed in individuals without
anorexia nervosa who are significantly undern ourished, many of the depressive features
may be secondary to the physiological sequelae of semi-starvation, although they may also
be sufficiently severe to warr ant an additional diagnosis of major depressive disorder. 
Obsessive-compulsive features, both related and unrelated to food, are often prominent.
Most individuals with anorexia nervosa are pr eoccupied with thoughts of food. Some col-
lect recipes or hoard food. Ob servations of behaviors associated with other forms of star-
vation suggest that obsessions and compulsi ons related to food may be exacerbated by
undernutrition. When individuals with anorexia nervosa exhibit obsessions and compul-
sions that are not related to food, body shape, or weight, an additional diagnosis of obses-
sive-compulsive disorder (OCD) may be warranted.
Other features sometimes associated with anorexia nervosa incl ude concerns about
eating in public, feelings of ineffectiveness, a strong desire  to control one’s environment,
inflexible thinking, limited social spontaneity, and overly restrained emotional ex-
pression. Compared with indivi duals with anorexia nervosa, restricting type, those with
binge-eating/purging type have higher rates of impulsivity and are more likely to abuse
alcohol and other drugs. 
A subgroup of individuals with anorexia ne rvosa show excessive levels of physical ac-
tivity. Increases in physical activity often precede onset of the disorder, and over the
course of the disorder increased activity ac celerates weight loss. During treatment, exces-
sive activity may be difficult to control,  thereby jeopardizing weight recovery.
Individuals with anorexia nervosa may misu se medications, such as by manipulating
dosage, in order to achieve we ight loss or avoid weight ga in. Individuals with diabetes
mellitus may omit or reduce insulin doses in order to minimi ze carbohydrate  metabolism. 
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of anorexia nervosa among youn g females is approximately
0.4%. Less is known about prevalence among ma les, but anorexia nerv osa is far less com-
mon in males than in females, with clinical populations generally reflecting approximately
a 10:1 female-to-male ratio. 
Development and Course
Anorexia nervosa commonly begins during adolescence or young adulthood. It rarely be-
gins before puberty or after age 40, but cases of both early and late onset have been de-
scribed. The onset of this disorder is often a ssociated with a stressful life event, such as
leaving home for college. The course and outcom e of anorexia nervosa are highly variable.
Younger individuals may manifest atypical features, including denying “fear of fat.” Older
342 Feeding and Eating Disorders
individuals more likely have a longer duration of illness, and their clinical presentation may
include more signs and symptoms of long-stand ing disorder. Clinicians should not exclude
anorexia nervosa from the differential diag nosis solely on the basis of older age.
Many individuals have a period of changed ea ting behavior prior to full criteria for the
disorder being met. Some individuals with anorexia nervosa recover fully after a single
episode, with some ex hibiting a fluctuating pattern of weight gain followed by relapse,
and others experiencing a chronic course over many years. Hospitalization may be re-
quired to restore weight and to address medical complications. Most individuals with an-
orexia nervosa experience remission within 5 years of presentation. Among individuals
admitted to hospitals, overall remission rates may be lower. The crude mortality rate (CMR)
for anorexia nervosa is approximately 5% pe r decade. Death most commonly results from
medical complications associated with the disorder itself or from suicide.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Individuals who develop anxiety disorders or display obsessional
traits in childhood are at increased risk of developing anorexia nervosa.
Environmental. Historical and cross-cultural variab ility in the prevalence of anorexia
nervosa supports its association with cultures and settings in which thinness is valued. Oc-
cupations and avocations that encourage thinness, such as modeling and elite athletics, are
also associated with increased risk. 
Genetic and physiological. There is an increased risk of  anorexia nervosa and bulimia
nervosa among first-degree biolog ical relatives of individuals with the disorder. An in-
creased risk of bipolar and depressive diso rders has also been found among first-degree
relatives of individuals with anorexia nervos a, particularly relati ves of individuals with
the binge-eating/purging type. Concordance rates for anorexia nervosa in monozygotic
twins are significantly higher than those for dizygotic twins. A range of brain abnormali-
ties has been described in an orexia nervosa using functional imaging technologies (func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging, positro n emission tomography).  The degree to which
these findings reflect changes associated with  malnutrition versus primary abnormalities
associated with the disorder is unclear.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Anorexia nervosa occurs across culturally and so cially diverse populations, although available
evidence suggests cross-cultural variation in its occurrence and pres entation. Anorexia ner-
vosa is probably most prevalent in post-industr ialized, high-income coun tries such as in the
United States, many European c ountries, Australia, New Zealand,  and Japan, but its incidence
in most low- and middle-income countries is uncertain. Whereas the prevalence of anorexia
nervosa appears comparatively low among Latino s, African Americans, and Asians in the
United States, clinicians should be aware that mental health service utilization among individ-
uals with an eating disorder is significantly lo wer in these ethnic groups and that the low rates
may reflect an ascertainment bias. The presenta tion of weight concer ns among individuals
with eating and feeding disorders varies substa ntially across cultural contexts. The absence of
an expressed intense fear of we ight gain, sometimes referred to  as “fat phobia,” appears to be
relatively more common in popu lations in Asia, where the rati onale for dietary restriction is
commonly related to a more culturally sanction ed complaint such as gastrointestinal discom-
fort. Within the United States, presentations with out a stated intense fear of weight gain may
be comparatively more common among Latino groups.
Diagnostic Markers
The following laboratory abnorm alities may be observed in anorexia nervosa; their pres-
ence may serve to increase diagnostic confidence. 
Anorexia Nervosa 343
Hematology. Leukopenia is common, with the loss of all cell types but usually with ap-
parent lymphocytosis. Mild anemia can occur,  as well as thrombocytopenia and, rarely,
bleeding problems. 
Serum chemistry. Dehydration may be reflected by an elevated blood urea nitrogen
level. Hypercholesterolemia is common. Hepa tic enzyme levels may be elevated. Hypo-
magnesemia, hypozincemia, hypophosphatemia, and hyperamylasemia are occasionally
observed. Self-induced vomiting may lead to metabolic alkalosis (elevated serum bicarbon-
ate), hypochloremia, and hypokalemia; laxative  abuse may cause a mild metabolic acidosis. 
Endocrine. Serum thyroxine (T4) levels are usually in the low-normal rang e; triiodothy-
ronine (T3) levels are decreased, while reverse T3 levels are elevated. Females have low se-
rum estrogen levels, whereas males have  low levels of se rum testosterone.
Electrocardiography. Sinus bradycardia is common, and,  rarely, arrhythmias are noted.
Significant prolongation of the QTc interv al is observed in some individuals. 
Bone mass. Low bone mineral density, with specific areas of osteopenia or osteoporo-
sis, is often seen. The risk of fr acture is significantly elevated.
Electroencephalography. Diffuse abnormalities, reflecting a metabolic encephalopa-
thy, may result from significant fluid and electrolyte disturbances. 
Resting energy expenditure. There is often a significant redu ction in resting energy ex-
penditure.
Physical signs and symptoms. Many of the physical sign s and symptoms of anorexia
nervosa are attributable to starvation. Amen orrhea is commonly present and appears to
be an indicator of physiological dysfunction. If present, amenorrhea is usually a conse-
quence of the weight loss, but in a minority  of individuals it may actually precede the
weight loss. In prepubertal females, menarche may be delayed. In addition to amenorrhea,
there may be complaints of constipation, abdo minal pain, cold intole rance, lethargy, and
excess energy.
The most remarkable finding on physical ex amination is emaciation. Commonly, there
is also significant hypotension, hypothermia, and bradycardia. Some individuals develop
lanugo, a fine downy body hair. Some de velop peripheral edema, especially during
weight restoration or upon cessation of laxa tive and diuretic abuse. Rarely, petechiae or
ecchymoses, usually on the extremities, may indicate a bleeding diathesis. Some individ-
uals evidence a yellowing of the skin associat ed with hypercarotenemia. As may be seen in
individuals with bulimia nervosa, individu als with anorexia ne rvosa who self-induce
vomiting may have hypertrophy of the salivary glands, particularly the parotid glands, as
well as dental enamel erosion. Some individu als may have scars or calluses on the dorsal
surface of the hand from repeated contac t with the teeth while inducing vomiting.
Suicide Risk
Suicide risk is elevated in anorexia nervosa,  with rates reported as 12 per 100,000 per year.
Comprehensive evaluation of individuals wi th anorexia nervosa should include assess-
ment of suicide-related ideation and behavior s as well as other risk factors for suicide, in-
cluding a history of suicide attempt(s). 
Functional Consequences  of Anorexia Nervosa
Individuals with anorexia nervosa may exhibit a range of functional limitations associated
with the disorder. While some individuals rema in active in social and professional func-
tioning, others demonstrate significant social isolation and/or failure to fulfill academic or
career potential. 
344 Feeding and Eating Disorders
Differential Diagnosis
Other possible causes of either significantly low body weight or significant weight loss
should be considered in the differential diagno sis of anorexia nervosa, especially when the
presenting features are atypical (e.g., onset after age 40 years). 
Medical conditions (e.g., gastrointestinal disease, hyperthyroidism, occult malignan-
cies, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS]). Serious weight loss may oc-
cur in medical conditions, but individuals with  these disorders usually do not also mani-
fest a disturbance in the way their body weig ht or shape is experienced or an intense fear
of weight gain or persist in behaviors that interfere with appropriate weight gain. Acute
weight loss associated with a medical condition can occasionally be followed by the onset
or recurrence of anorexia nervosa, which can initially be masked by the comorbid medical
condition. Rarely, anorexia nervosa develo ps after bariatric surgery for obesity. 
Major depressive disorder. In major depressive disorder, severe weight loss may occur,
but most individuals with major depressive diso rder do not have either a desire for exces-
sive weight loss or an inte nse fear of gaining weight. 
Schizophrenia. Individuals with schizophrenia may exhibit odd eating behavior and oc-
casionally experience significant weight loss, but they rarely show the fear of gaining
weight and the body image disturbance requir ed for a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa. 
Substance use disorders. Individuals with subs tance use disorders may experience low
weight due to poor nutritional intake but gene rally do not fear gaining weight and do not
manifest body image di sturbance. Individuals who abuse substances that reduce appetite
(e.g., cocaine, stimulan ts) and who also endorse fear of weight gain should be carefully
evaluated for the possibility of  comorbid anorexia nervosa, given that the substance use
may represent a persistent behavior that inte rferes with weight gain (Criterion B).
Social anxiety disorder (social phobia), ob sessive-compulsive disorder, and body dys-
morphic disorder. Some of the features of anorexia ne rvosa overlap with the criteria for
social phobia, OCD, and body dysmorphic diso rder. Specifically, individuals may feel hu-
miliated or embarrassed to be seen eating in public, as in social phobia; may exhibit obses-
sions and compulsions related to  food, as in OCD; or may be preoccupied with an imagined
defect in bodily appearance, as in body dysmor phic disorder. If the in dividual with anorexia
nervosa has social fears that are limited to eating behavior alone, the diagnosis of social pho-
bia should not be made, but social fears unrelate d to eating behavior (e.g., excessive fear of
speaking in public) may warrant an additional diagnosis of social phobia. Similarly, an ad-
ditional diagnosis of OCD should be considered only if the individu al exhibits obsessions
and compulsions unrelated to food (e.g., an ex cessive fear of contamination), and an addi-
tional diagnosis of body dysmorphic disorder sh ould be considered only if the distortion is
unrelated to body shape and size (e.g., preoccupation th at one’s nose is too big).
Bulimia nervosa. Individuals with bulimia nervosa ex hibit recurrent ep isodes of binge
eating, engage in inappropriat e behavior to avoid weight ga in (e.g., self-induced vomit-
ing), and are overly concerned with body sh ape and weight. However, unlike individuals
with anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging type, individuals with bulimia nervosa main-
tain body weight at or ab ove a minimally normal level.
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder. Individuals with this disorder may exhibit
significant weight loss or significant nutritiona l deficiency, but they do not have a fear of
gaining weight or of becoming fat, nor do th ey have a disturbance in the way they expe-
rience their body shape and weight. 
Comorbidity
Bipolar, depressive, and anxiety disorders commonly co-occur with anorexia nervosa.
Many individuals with anorexia nervosa report  the presence of either an anxiety disorder
Bulimia Nervosa 345
or symptoms prior to onset of their eating d isorder. OCD is described in some individuals
with anorexia nervosa, especially those with the restricting type. Alcohol use disorder and
other substance use disorders may also be co morbid with anorexia nervosa, especially
among those with the binge-eating/purging type.
Bulimia Nervosa
Diagnostic Criteria 307.51 (F50.2)
A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is characterized by
both of the following:
1. Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period), an amount of
food that is definitely larger than what most individuals would eat in a similar period
of time under similar circumstances.
2. A sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g., a feeling that one
cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating).
B. Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behaviors in order to prevent weight gain, such
as self-induced vomiting; misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or other medications; fasting;
or excessive exercise.
C. The binge eating and inappropriate compensatory behaviors both occur, on average,
at least once a week for 3 months.
D. Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape and weight.
E. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during episodes of anorexia nervosa.
Specify if:
In partial remission:  After full criteria for bulimia nervosa were previously met, some,
but not all, of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
In full remission:  After full criteria for bulimia nervosa were previously met, none of
the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
Specify current severity:
The minimum level of severity is based on the frequency of inappropriate compensatory
behaviors (see below). The level of severity may be increased to reflect other symptoms
and the degree of functional disability.
Mild:  An average of 1–3 episodes of inappropriate compensatory behaviors per week.
Moderate: An average of 4–7 episodes of inappropriate compensatory behaviors per
week.
Severe:  An average of 8–13 episodes of inappropriate compensatory behaviors per
week.
Extreme:  An average of 14 or more episodes of inappropriate compensatory behav-
iors per week.
Diagnostic Features
There are three essential features of bulimia nervosa: recurrent episodes of binge eating
(Criterion A), recurrent inappropriate comp ensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain
(Criterion B), and self-evaluat ion that is unduly influenced by body shape and weight
(Criterion D). To qualify for the diagnosis, the binge eating and inappropriate compensa-
tory behaviors must occur, on average, at least once per week for 3 months (Criterion C).
An “episode of binge eating” is defined as  eating, in a discrete period of time, an
amount of food that is definitely larger than  most individuals would eat in a similar period
of time under similar circumstances (Criterion  A1). The context in which the eating occurs
346 Feeding and Eating Disorders
may affect the clinician’s esti mation of whether the intake is excessive. For example, a
quantity of food that might be regarded as excessive for a typical meal might be consid-
ered normal during a celebration or holiday me al. A “discrete period of time” refers to a
limited period, usually less than  2 hours. A single episode of binge eating need not be re-
stricted to one setting. For example, an individual may begin a binge in a restaurant and
then continue to eat on re turning home. Continual snacki ng on small amounts of food
throughout the day would not be considered an eating binge. 
An occurrence of excessive food consumptio n must be accompanied by a sense of lack
of control (Criterion A2) to be considered an episode of binge eating. An indicator of loss
of control is the inability to refrain from eating  or to stop eating once started. Some indi-
viduals describe a dissociative quality during , or following, the bing e-eating episodes. The
impairment in control associated with binge eating may not be abso lute; for example, an
individual may continue binge eating while the telephone is ringing but will cease if a
roommate or spouse unexpected ly enters the room. Some in dividuals report that their
binge-eating episodes are no longer characterize d by an acute feeling of  loss of control but
rather by a more generalized pattern of uncont rolled eating. If individuals report that they
have abandoned efforts to control their eati ng, loss of control should be considered as
present. Binge eating can also be planned in some instances.
The type of food co nsumed during binges varies both across individuals and for a
given individual. Binge eating appears to be characterized more by an abnormality in the
amount of food consumed than by a craving for a specific nutrient. However, during binges,
individuals tend to eat foods they would otherwise avoid. 
Individuals with bulimia nervosa are typica lly ashamed of their eating problems and
attempt to conceal their symptoms. Binge eating  usually occurs in secrecy or as inconspic-
uously as possible. The binge eating often cont inues until the individual is uncomfortably,
or even painfully, full. The most common antecedent of binge eating is negative affect.
Other triggers include interpersonal stressors; dietary restraint; negative feelings related
to body weight, body shape, and food; and boredom. Binge eating may minimize or mit-
igate factors that precipitated  the episode in the short-term, but negative self-evaluation
and dysphoria often are the delayed consequences.
Another essential feature of bulimia nervosa is the recurrent use of inappropriate com-
pensatory behaviors to prevent weight gain, collectively referred to as purge behaviors or
purging  (Criterion B). Many individuals with bulimia nervosa employ  several methods to
compensate for binge eating. Vomiting is the most common inappropriate compensatory
behavior. The immediate effects of vomiting include relief from physical discomfort and re-
duction of fear of gaining weight. In some cases, vomiting becomes a goal in itself, and the
individual will binge eat in orde r to vomit or will vomit after eating a small amount of food.
Individuals with bulimia nervosa may use a vari ety of methods to induce vomiting, includ-
ing the use of fingers or instruments to stimulate the gag reflex. Individuals generally
become adept at inducing vomit ing and are eventually able to  vomit at will. Rarely, indi-
viduals consume syrup of ipecac to induce vomiting. Other purging behaviors include the
misuse of laxatives and diuretics. A number  of other compensatory methods may also be
used in rare cases. Individuals with bulim ia nervosa may misuse enemas following epi-
sodes of binge eating, but this is seldom th e sole compensatory method employed. Individ-
uals with this disorder may take thyroid ho rmone in an attempt to avoid weight gain.
Individuals with diabetes mellitus and bulimia nervosa may omit or reduce insulin doses in
order to reduce the metabolism of food cons umed during eating bi nges. Individuals with
bulimia nervosa may fast for a da y or more or exercise excessive ly in an attempt to prevent
weight gain. Exercise may be considered excessi ve when it significantly interferes with im-
portant activities, when it occurs at inappr opria te times or in i nappropriate settings, or
when the individual continues to exercise despite injury or  other medical complications.
Individuals with bulimia nervosa place an ex cessive emphasis on body shape or weight
in their self-evaluation, and these factors ar e typically extremely important in determining
Bulimia Nervosa 347
self-esteem (Criterion D). Individuals with this disorder may closely resemble those with
anorexia nervosa in their fear of gaining weight, in their desire to lose weight, and in the
level of dissatisfaction with their bodies. Ho wever, a diagnosis of bulimia nervosa should
not be given when the disturbance occurs only  during episodes of anorexia nervosa (Cri-
terion E).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with bulimia nervosa typically ar e within the normal weight or overweight
range (body mass index [BMI] ≥ 18.5 and < 30 in adults). The disorder occurs but is un-
common among obese individuals. Between eati ng binges, individuals with bulimia ner-
vosa typically restrict their to tal caloric consumption and preferentially select low-calorie
(“diet”) foods while avoiding foods that they pe rceive to be fattening or likely to trigger a
binge.
Menstrual irregularity or amenorrhea ofte n occurs among females with bulimia ner-
vosa; it is uncertain whether su ch disturbances are related to weight fluctuations, to nu-
tritional deficiencies, or to emotional dist ress. The fluid and electrolyte disturbances
resulting from the purging behavior are some times sufficiently severe to constitute med-
ically serious problems. Rare but potentially fatal complications include esophageal tears,
gastric rupture, and cardiac arrhythmias. Serious cardiac and skeletal myopathies have
been reported among individual s following repeated use of syrup of ipecac to induce vom-
iting. Individuals who chronically abuse laxatives may become dependent on their use to
stimulate bowel movements. Gastrointestin al symptoms are commonly associated with
bulimia nervosa, and rectal prolapse has also  been reported among individuals with this
disorder.
Prevalence
Twelve-month prevalence of bulimia ner vosa among young female s is 1%–1.5%. Point
prevalence is highest among young adults si nce the disorder peaks in older adolescence
and young adulthood. Less is known about th e point prevalence of bulimia nervosa in
males, but bulimia nervosa is far less common in  males than it is in females, with an ap-
proximately 10:1 female-to-male ratio. 
Development and Course
Bulimia nervosa commonly begins in adolesce nce or young adulthood. Onset before pu-
berty or after age 40 is uncommon. The binge eating frequently begins during or after an
episode of dieting to lose weight. Experiencing  multiple stressful lif e events also can pre-
cipitate onset of bulimia nervosa.
Disturbed eating behavior persists for at least several years in a high percentage of
clinic samples. The course may be chronic or intermittent, with periods of remission
alternating with recurrences of binge eating. However, over longer -term follow-up, the
symptoms of many individuals appear to diminish with or without treatment, although
treatment clearly impacts outcome. Periods of remission longer than 1 year are associated
with better long-term outcome.
Significantly elevated risk fo r mortality (all-cause and suic ide) has been reported for
individuals with bulimia nervosa. The CMR (c rude mortality rate) for bulimia nervosa is
nearly 2% per decade. 
Diagnostic cross-over from initial bulimia ne rvosa to anorexia nervosa occurs in a mi-
nority of cases (10%–15%). Individuals who do experience cross-over to anorexia nervosa
commonly will revert back to bulimia nervosa or have multiple occurrences of cross-overs
between these disorders. A subset of individu als with bulimia nervosa continue to binge
eat but no longer engage in inappropriate compensatory behaviors, and therefore their
348 Feeding and Eating Disorders
symptoms meet criteria for binge-eating disord er or other specified eating disorder. Diag-
nosis should be based on the current (i.e.,  past 3 months) clinical presentation.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Weight concerns, low self-esteem, de pressive symptoms, social anxi-
ety disorder, and overanxious d isorder of childhood are associated with increased risk for
the development of bulimia nervosa. 
Environmental. Internalization of a thin body ideal has been found to increase risk for
developing weight concerns, which in turn increase risk for the development of bulimia
nervosa. Individuals who experienced childhood  sexual or physical abuse are at increased
risk for developing bulimia nervosa. 
Genetic and physiological. Childhood obesity and early pubertal maturation increase
risk for bulimia nervosa. Familial transmission of bulimia ne rvosa may be present, as well
as genetic vulnerabilities for the disorder.
Course modifiers. Severity of psychiatric comorbidity predicts worse long-term outcome
of bulimia nervosa.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Bulimia nervosa has been reported to occur wi th roughly similar frequencies in most in-
dustrialized countries, including the United  States, Canada, many European countries,
Australia, Japan, New Zealand, and South Afri ca. In clinical studies of bulimia nervosa in
the United States, individuals presenting with  this disorder are pr imarily white. However,
the disorder also occurs in ot her ethnic groups and with prevalence comparable to esti-
mated prevalences observed in white samples.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Bulimia nervosa is far more common in females than in males. Males are especially under-
represented in treatment-seeking samples, for reasons that have not yet been systemati-
cally examined.
Diagnostic Markers
No specific diagnostic test for bulimia nerv osa currently exists. However, several labora-
tory abnormalities may occur as a conseque nce of purging and may increase diagnostic
certainty. These include fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, such as hypokalemia (which
can provoke cardiac arrhythmias), hypochloremia, and hyponatremia. The loss of gastric
acid through vomiting may prod uce a metabolic alkalosis (elevated serum bicarbonate),
and the frequent induction of diarrhea or de hydration through laxative and diuretic abuse
can cause metabolic acidosis. Some individual s with bulimia nervosa exhibit mildly ele-
vated levels of serum amylase, pr obably reflecting an increase in the salivary isoenzyme.
Physical examination usually yields no physical findings. However, inspection of the
mouth may reveal significant and permanent loss of dental enamel, especially from lin-
gual surfaces of the front teeth due to recurrent vomiting. These teeth may become
chipped and appear ragged and “moth-eaten.” There may also be an increased frequency
of dental caries. In some individuals, the salivary glands, particularly the parotid glands,
may become notably enlarged. Individuals who induce vomiting by manually stimulating
the gag reflex may develop calluses or scars on the dorsal surface of the hand from re-
peated contact with the teeth. Serious cardia c and skeletal myopathies have been reported
among individuals following repeated use of  syrup of ipecac to induce vomiting.
Bulimia Nervosa 349
Suicide Risk
Suicide risk is elevated in bu limia nervosa. Comprehensive ev aluation of individuals with
this disorder should include assessment of su icide-related ideation and behaviors as well
as other risk factors for suicide, including a history of suicide attempts.
Functional Consequences  of Bulimia Nervosa
Individuals with bulimia nervosa may exhibit a range of functional limitations associated
with the disorder. A minority of individuals report severe role impairment, with the so-
cial-life domain most likely to be ad versely affected by  bulimia nervosa. 
Differential Diagnosis
Anorexia nervosa, binge-eating/purging type. Individuals whose bi nge-eating behav-
ior occurs only during episodes of anorexia  nervosa are given the diagnosis anorexia ner-
vosa, binge-eating/purging type, and should  not be given the additional diagnosis of
bulimia nervosa. For individuals with an init ial diagnosis of anorexia nervosa who binge
and purge but whose presentation no longer meets the full criteria for anorexia nervosa,
binge-eating/purging type (e.g., when weight  is normal), a diagnosis of bulimia ner-
vosa should be given only when all criteria for bulimia nervosa have been met for at least
3m o n t h s .  
Binge-eating disorder. Some individuals binge eat but do  not engage in regular inap-
propriate compensatory behaviors. In these ca ses, the diagnosis of binge-eating disorder
should be considered.
Kleine-Levin syndrome. In certain neurological or other medical conditions, such as
Kleine-Levin syndrome, there is disturbed eating behavior, but the characteristic psycho-
logical features of bulimia nervosa, such as overconcern with body shape and weight, are
not present. 
Major depressive disorder, with atypical features. Overeating is common in major de-
pressive disorder, with atypical  features, but individuals with this disorder do not engage
in inappropriate compensatory behaviors an d do not exhibit the excessive concern with
body shape and weight characteristic of bulimia  nervosa. If criteria for both disorders are
met, both diagnoses should be given. 
Borderline personality disorder. Binge-eating behavior is included in the impulsive be-
havior criterion that is part of the definition  of borderline personality disorder. If the cri-
teria for both borderline personality disorder and bulimia nervosa are met, both diagnoses
should be given.
Comorbidity 
Comorbidity with mental diso rders is common in individuals with bulimia nervosa, with
most experiencing at least on e other mental disorder and many experiencing multiple co-
morbidities. Comorbidity is not limited to any particular su bset but rather occurs across a
wide range of mental disorders. There is an  increased frequency of depressive symptoms
(e.g., low self-esteem) and bipo lar and depressive disorders (particularly depressive dis-
orders) in individuals with bu limia nervosa. In many indivi duals, the mood disturbance
begins at the same time as or following th e development of bulimia nervosa, and individ-
uals often ascribe their mood disturbances to  the bulimia nervosa. However, in some in-
dividuals, the mood disturbance clearly precedes the development of bulimia nervosa.
There may also be an increased frequency of anxiety symptoms (e.g., fear of social situa-
tions) or anxiety disorders. These mood and anxiety disturbances fr equently remit follow-
350 Feeding and Eating Disorders
ing effective treatment of the bulimia nervosa. The lifetime prevalence of substance use,
particularly alcohol or stimulant use, is at least 30% among individuals with bulimia ner-
vosa. Stimulant use often begins in an attempt to control appetite and weight. A substan-
tial percentage of individuals with bulimia nervosa also have personality features that
meet criteria for one or more personality diso rders, most frequently  borderline personality
disorder.
Binge-Eating Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 307.51 (F50.8)
A. Recurrent episodes of binge eating. An episode of binge eating is characterized
by both of the following:
1. Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any 2-hour period), an amount of
food that is definitely larger than what most people would eat in a similar period of
time under similar circumstances.
2. A sense of lack of control over eating during the episode (e.g., a feeling that one
cannot stop eating or control what or how much one is eating).
B. The binge-eating episodes are associated with three (or more) of the following:
1. Eating much more rapidly than normal.
2. Eating until feeling uncomfortably full.
3. Eating large amounts of food when not feeling physically hungry.
4. Eating alone because of feeling embarrassed by how much one is eating.
5. Feeling disgusted with oneself, depressed, or very guilty afterward.
C. Marked distress regarding binge eating is present.
D. The binge eating occurs, on average, at least once a week for 3 months.
E. The binge eating is not associated with the recurrent use of inappropriate compensa-
tory behavior as in bulimia nervosa and does not occur exclusively during the course
of bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa.
Specify if:
In partial remission:  After full criteria for binge-eating disorder were previously met,
binge eating occurs at an average frequency of less than one episode per week for a
sustained period of time. 
In full remission: After full criteria for binge-eating disorder were previously met, none
of the criteria have been met for a sustained period of time.
Specify current severity:
The minimum level of severity is based on the frequency of episodes of binge eating (see
below). The level of severity may be increased to reflect other symptoms and the degree
of functional disability.
Mild:  1–3 binge-eating episodes per week.
Moderate: 4–7 binge-eating episodes per week.
Severe:  8–13 binge-eating episodes per week.
Extreme:  14 or more binge-eating episodes per week.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of binge-eating disorder is recurrent episodes of binge eating that
must occur, on average, at le ast once per week for 3 months (Criterion D). An “episode of
binge eating” is defined as eating, in a discrete pe riod of time, an amount of food that is defi-
Binge-Eating Disorder 351
nitely larger than most people would eat in a similar period of time under similar circum-
stances (Criterion A1). The context in which the eating occurs may affect the clinician’s
estimation of whether the intake is excessive. For example, a quantity of food that might be
regarded as excessive for a typical meal migh t be considered normal  during a celebration
or holiday meal. A “discrete period of time” refers to a limited pe riod, usually less than
2 hours. A single episode of binge eating need not be restricted to one setting. For example,
an individual may begin a binge in a restaurant and then continue to eat on returning
home. Continual snacking on small amounts of  food throughout the day would not be con-
sidered an eating binge. 
An occurrence of excessive food consumptio n must be accompanie d by a sense of lack
of control (Criterion A2) to be considered an episode of binge eating. An indicator of loss
of control is the inability to refrain from eating  or to stop eating once started. Some indi-
viduals describe a dissociative quality during , or following, the bing e-eating episodes. The
impairment in control associated with binge eating may not be abso lute; for example, an
individual may continue binge eating while the telephone is ringing but will cease if a
roommate or spouse unexpected ly enters the room. Some in dividuals report that their
binge-eating episodes are no longer characterize d by an acute feeling of loss of control but
rather by a more generalized pattern of uncont rolled eating. If individuals report that they
have abandoned efforts to control their eating , loss of control may still be considered as
present. Binge eating can also be planned in some instances.
The type of food consumed during binges varies both across individuals and for a given
individual. Binge eating appears to be characterized more by an abnormality in the amount
of food consumed than by a cr aving for a specific nutrient.
Binge eating must be characterized by marked  distress (Criterion C) and at least three
of the following features: eating much more rapidly than normal; eating until feeling un-
comfortably full; eating large amounts of food when not feeling physically hungry; eating
alone because of feeling embarrassed by how much one is eating; and feeling disgusted
with oneself, depressed, or very  guilty afterward (Criterion B).
Individuals with binge-eating disorder are typically ashamed of their eating problems
and attempt to conceal their symptoms. Binge ea ting usually occurs in secrecy or as incon-
spicuously as possible. The most common antece dent of binge eating is negative affect.
Other triggers include interpersonal stressors; dietary restraint; negative feelings related
to body weight, body shape, and food; and boredom. Binge eating may minimize or mit-
igate factors that precipitated the episode in  the short-term, but negative self-evaluation
and dysphoria often are the delayed consequences.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Binge-eating disorder occurs in normal-weight/ overweight and obese individuals. It is re-
liably associated with overweight and obes ity in treatment-seekin g individuals. Never-
theless, binge-eating disorder is distinct from obesity. Most obese individuals do not
engage in recurrent binge eating. In addition, compared with weight-matched obese indi-
viduals without binge-eating disorder, those with the disorder consume more calories in
laboratory studies of eating behavior and ha ve greater functional impairment, lower qual-
ity of life, more subjective distress,  and greater psychiatric comorbidity.
Prevalence
Twelve-month prevalence of binge-eating disorder among U.S. adult (age 18 or older) fe-
males and males is 1.6% and 0.8%, respectively. The gender ratio is far less skewed in binge-
eating disorder than in bulimia nervosa. Bing e-eating disorder is as prevalent among fe-
males from racial or ethnic minority groups as has been reported for white females. The
disorder is more prevalent among individual s seeking weight-loss treatment than in the
general population. 
352 Feeding and Eating Disorders
Development and Course
Little is known about the deve lopment of binge-eating disorder. Both binge eating and
loss-of-control eating without objectively ex cessive consumption occur in children and are
associated with increased body fat, weight gain, and increases in psychological symptoms.
Binge eating is common in adolescent and college-age samples. Loss -of-control eating or
episodic binge eating may represent a prodroma l phase of eating disorders for some indi-
viduals. 
Dieting follows the development of binge eating in many indi viduals with binge-
eating disorder. (This is in contrast to bu limia nervosa, in which dysfunctional dieting
usually precedes the onset of binge eating.) Binge-eating disorder typically begins in ad-
olescence or young adulthood but can begin in later adulthood. In dividuals with binge-
eating disorder who seek treatment usually ar e older than individuals with either bulimia
nervosa or anorexia nerv osa who seek treatment.
Remission rates in both natural course an d treatment outcome studies are higher for
binge-eating disorder than fo r bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa. Binge-eating disorder
appears to be relatively persistent, and the cour se is comparable to that of bulimia nervosa
in terms of severity and duration. Crossover from binge-eating diso rder to other eating
disorders is uncommon.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Genetic and physiological. Binge-eating disorder appears to run in families, which may
reflect additive genetic influences. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Binge-eating disorder occurs with roughly similar frequencies in most industrialized
countries, including the United States, Cana da, many European countries, Australia, and
New Zealand. In the United States, the prevalence of binge-eating disorder appears com-
parable among non-Latino whites, Latinos, Asians, and African Americans.
Functional Consequences of Binge-Eating Disorder
Binge-eating disorder is associated with a ra nge of functional consequences, including so-
cial role adjustment problems, impaired health-related quality of life and life satisfaction,
increased medical morbidity and mortality, an d associated increased health care utiliza-
tion compared with body mass index (BMI)–ma tched control subjects. It may also be as-
sociated with an increased risk for weig ht gain and the development of obesity.
Differential Diagnosis
Bulimia nervosa. Binge-eating disorder has recurrent binge eating in common with bu-
limia nervosa but differs from the latter disord er in some fundamental respects. In terms of
clinical presentation, the recurrent inapprop riate compensatory behavior (e.g., purging,
driven exercise) seen in bulim ia nervosa is absent in binge-eating disorder. Unlike in-
dividuals with bulimia nervosa, individuals wi th binge-eating disorder typically do not
show marked or sustained dietary restriction designed to influence body weight and
shape between binge-eating episodes. They may, however, report frequent attempts at
dieting. Binge-eating disorder al so differs from bulimia nervosa in terms of response to treat-
ment. Rates of improvement ar e consistently higher among individuals with binge-eating
disorder than among those with bulimia nervosa.
Obesity. Binge-eating disorder is associated  with overweight and obesity but has
several key features that are distinct from ob esity. First, levels of overvaluation of body
Other Specified Feeding or Eating Disorder 353
weight and shape are higher in obese individuals with the disorder than in those without
the disorder. Second, rates of psychiatric comorbidity are significantly higher among
obese individuals with the disorder compared with those without the disorder. Third, the
long-term successful outcome of evidence-based psychological treatments for binge-
eating disorder can be contrasted with the absence of effective long-term treatments for
obesity.
Bipolar and depressive disorders. Increases in appetite and weight gain are included
in the criteria for major depressive episode an d in the atypical features specifiers for de-
pressive and bipolar disorders. Increased eati ng in the context of a major depressive epi-
sode may or may not be associated with loss of control. If the full crit eria for both disorders
are met, both diagnoses can be given. Binge eating and other symptoms of disordered eat-
ing are seen in association with bipolar disorder . If the full criteria for both disorders are
met, both diagnoses should be given.
Borderline personality disorder. Binge eating is included in  the impulsive behavior cri-
terion that is part of the definition of border line personality disorder. If the full criteria for
both disorders are met, both  diagnoses should be given.
Comorbidity 
Binge-eating disorder is associated with si gnificant psychiatric comorbidity that is com-
parable to that of bulimia ne rvosa and anorexia nervosa. Th e most common comorbid dis-
orders are bipolar disorders, depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and, to a lesser
degree, substance use disorders. The psychiat ric comorbidity is linked to the severity of
binge eating and not to the degree of obesity.
Other Specified Feeding or Eating Disorder
307.59 (F50.8)
This category applies to presentations in wh ich symptoms characteristic of a feeding and
eating disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupation-
al, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for
any of the disorders in the feeding and eating disorders diagnostic class. The other spec-
ified feeding or eating disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses
to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any
specific feeding and eating disorder. This is done by recording “other specified feeding or
eating disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “bulimia nervosa of low frequency”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1.Atypical anorexia nervosa: All of the criteria for anorexia nervosa are met, except
that despite significant weight loss, the indi vidual’s weight is within or above the normal
range.
2.Bulimia nervosa (of low freque ncy and/or limited duration):  All of the criteria for
bulimia nervosa are met, except that the binge eating and inappropriate compensatory
behaviors occur, on average, less than once a week and/or for less than 3 months.
3.Binge-eating disorder (of low frequency and/ or limited duration):  All of the criteria
for binge-eating disorder are met, except that the binge eating occurs, on average, less
than once a week and/or for less than 3 months.
4.Purging disorder:  Recurrent purging behavior to influence weight or shape (e.g., self-
induced vomiting; misuse of laxatives, diur etics, or other medications) in the absence
of binge eating.
354 Feeding and Eating Disorders
5.Night eating syndrome:  Recurrent episodes of night eating, as manifested by eating
after awakening from sleep or by excessive food consumption after the evening meal.
There is awareness and recall of the eating. The night eating is not better explained by
external influences such as changes in the individual’s sleep-wake cycle or by local so-
cial norms. The night eating causes significant distress and/or impairment in function-
ing. The disordered pattern of eating is not better explained by binge-eating disorder
or another mental disorder, including substance use, and is not attributable to another
medical disorder or to an effect of medication.
Unspecified Feeding or Eating Disorder
307.50 (F50.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a feeding and
eating disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupation-
al, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for
any of the disorders in the feeding and eating disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified
feeding or eating disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not
to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific feeding and eating disorder,
and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more spe-
cific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings). 