451 Gender
 Dysphoria
In this chapter,  there is one overarching diagnosis of gender dysphoria, with sepa-
rate developmentally appropriate criteria sets  for children and for adolescents and adults.
The area of sex and gender is highly controve rsial and has led to a proliferation of terms
whose meanings vary over time and within and between disciplines. An additional source
of confusion is that in English “sex” connotes  both male/female and se xuality. This chapter
employs constructs and terms as they are wide ly used by clinicians from various disci-
plines with specialization in this area. In this chapter, sex and sexual  refer to the biological
indicators of male and female (understood in  the context of reproductive capacity), such
as in sex chromosomes, gonads, sex hormon es, and nonambiguous internal and external
genitalia. Disorders of sex deve lopment denote condit ions of inborn somatic deviations of
the reproductive tract from the norm and/or discrepancies among the biological indica-
tors of male and female. Cross-sex  hormone treatment denotes the use of feminizing hor-
mones in an individual assigned male at birth based on traditional biological indicators or
the use of masculinizing hormones in an individual assigned female at birth.
The need to introduce the term gender  arose with the realization that for individuals
with conflicting or ambiguous biological indicato rs of sex (i.e., “intersex”), the lived role in
society and/or the identification as male or female could not be uniformly associated with
or predicted from the biological indicators and, later, that some individuals develop an
identity as female or male at variance with their uniform set of classical biological indica-
tors. Thus, gender is used to denote the public (and usually legally recognized) lived role as
boy or girl, man or woman, but, in contrast to  certain social construc tionist theories, biolog-
ical factors are seen as contributing, in intera ction with social and psychological factors, to
gender development. Gender assignment  refers to the initial assignment as male or female.
This occurs usually at birth and, thereby, yields the “natal gender.” Gender-atypical  refers to
somatic features or behaviors th at are not typical (in a statisti cal sense) of individuals with
the same assigned gender in a given so ciety and historical era; for behavior, gender-noncon-
forming  is an alternative descriptive term. Gender reassignment  denotes an official (and usu-
ally legal) change of gender. Gender identity  is a category of social identity and refers to an
individual’s identification as male, female, or, occasionally, some ca tegory other than male
or female. Gender dysphoria  as a general descriptive term refers to an individual’s affective/
cognitive discontent with the assigned gender  but is more specific ally defined when used
as a diagnostic category. Transgender  refers to the broad spectrum of individuals who tran-
siently or persistently identify with a gender different from their natal gender. Transsexual
denotes an individual who seeks,  or has undergone, a social transition from male to female
or female to male, which in many, but not all,  cases also involves a somatic transition by
cross-sex hormone treatment and genital surgery ( sex reassignment surgery). 
Gender dysphoria  refers to the distress that ma y accompany the incongruence between
one’s experienced or expressed gender and one’s assigned gender. Although not all indi-
viduals will experience distress as a result of such incongruence , many are distressed if the
desired physical interventions by means of hormones and/or surg ery are not avail able.
The cu rrent term is more descriptive than the previous DSM-IV term gender identity disor-
der and focuses on dysphoria as the clin ical problem, not identity per se. 
452 Gender Dysphoria
Gender Dysphoria
Diagnostic Criteria  
Gender Dysphoria in Children 302.6 (F64.2)
A. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and assigned
gender, of at least 6 months’ duration, as manifested by at least six of the following
(one of which must be Criterion A1):
1. A strong desire to be of the other gender or an insistence that one is the other gen-
der (or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender).
2. In boys (assigned gender), a strong preference for cross-dressing or simulating fe-
male attire; or in girls (assigned gender), a strong preference for wearing only typ-
ical masculine clothing and a strong resistance to the wearing of typical feminine
clothing.
3. A strong preference for cross-gender roles in make-believe play or fantasy play.
4. A strong preference for the toys, games, or  activities stereotypically used or en-
gaged in by the other gender.
5. A strong preference for playmates of the other gender.
6. In boys (assigned gender), a strong rejection of typically masculine toys, games,
and activities and a strong avoidance of rough-and-tumble play; or in girls (as-
signed gender), a strong rejection of typically feminine toys, games, and activities.
7. A strong dislike of one’s sexual anatomy.
8. A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics that match
one’s experienced gender.
B. The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
school, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With a disorder of sex development  (e.g., a congenital adrenogenital disorder such
as 255.2 [E25.0] congenital adrenal hyperplasia or 259.50 [E34.50] androgen insensi-
tivity syndrome).
Coding note:  Code the disorder of sex development as well as gender dysphoria.
Gender Dysphoria in Adolescents and Adults 302.85 (F64.1)
A. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and assigned
gender, of at least 6 months’ duration, as manifested by at least two of the following:
1. A marked incongruence between one’s experienced/expressed gender and pri-
mary and/or secondary sex characteristics (or in young adolescents, the antici-
pated secondary sex characteristics).
2. A strong desire to be rid of one’s primary and/or secondary sex characteristics be-
cause of a marked incongruence with one’s experienced/expressed gender (or in
young adolescents, a desire to prevent the development of the anticipated second-
ary sex characteristics).
3. A strong desire for the primary and/or secondary sex characteristics of the other
gender.
4. A strong desire to be of the other gender (or some alternative gender different from
one’s assigned gender).
5. A strong desire to be treated as the ot her gender (or some alternative gender dif-
ferent from one’s assigned gender).
6. A strong conviction that one has the typical feelings and reactions of the other gen-
der (or some alternative gender different from one’s assigned gender).
Gender Dysphoria 453
B. The condition is associated with clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With a disorder of sex development  (e.g., a congenital adrenogenital disorder such
as 255.2 [E25.0] congenital adrenal hyperplasia or 259.50 [E34.50] androgen insensi-
tivity syndrome).
Coding note:  Code the disorder of sex development as well as gender dysphoria.
Specify if:
Posttransition:  The individual has transitioned to full-time living in the desired gender
(with or without legalization of gender change) and has undergone (or is preparing to
have) at least one cross-sex medical proc edure or treatment regimen—namely, regu-
lar cross-sex hormone treatment or gender reassignment surgery confirming the desired
gender (e.g., penectomy, vaginoplasty in a natal male; mastectomy or phalloplasty in
a natal female).
Specifiers 
The posttransition specifier may be used in th e context of continuing  treatment procedures
that serve to support the new gender assignment. 
Diagnostic Features 
Individuals with gender dysphoria have a ma rked incongruence between the gender they
have been assigned to (usually  at birth, referred to as natal gender) and their experienced/
expressed gender. This discrepancy is the core componen t of the diagnosis. There must
also be evidence of distress about this inco ngruence. Experienced gender may include al-
ternative gender identities beyond binary stereotypes. Consequently, the distress is not
limited to a desire to simply be of the other gender, but may incl ude a desire to be of an al-
ternative gender, provided that it differs from the individual’s assigned gender. 
Gender dysphoria manifests itself differently in different age groups. Prepubertal natal
girls with gender dysphoria may express the wish  to be a boy, assert they are a boy, or as-
sert they will grow up to be a man. They prefer boys’ clothing and hairstyles, are often
perceived by strangers as boys, and may ask to be called by a boy’s na me. Usually, they dis-
play intense negative reactions to parental attempts to have them wear dresses or other
feminine attire. Some may refuse to attend sc hool or social events where such clothes are
required. These girls may demonstrate marked cr oss-gender identification in role-playing,
dreams, and fantasies. Contac t sports, rough-and-tumble pl ay, traditional boyhood games,
and boys as playmates are most often preferred. They show lit tle interest in stereotypically
feminine toys (e.g., dolls) or activities (e.g.,  feminine dress-up or role-play). Occasionally,
they refuse to urinate in a sitting position. Some natal girls may express a desire to have a
penis or claim to have a penis or that they will  grow one when older. They may also state that
they do not want to deve lop breasts or menstruate.
Prepubertal natal boys with gender dysphoria may express the wish to be a girl or as-
sert they are a girl or that they will grow up to be a woman. They have a preference for
dressing in girls’ or women’s clothes or ma y improvise clothing from available materials
(e.g., using towels, aprons, and scarves for lo ng hair or skirts). These children may role-
play female figures (e.g., play ing “mother”) and often are intensely interested in female
fantasy figures. Traditional feminine activities, stereotypical games, and pastimes (e.g.,
“playing house”; drawing feminine pictures; watc hing television or videos of favorite fe-
male characters) are most often preferred. Stereotypical female-type dolls (e.g., Barbie) are
often favorite toys, and girls are their prefer red playmates. They avoid rough-and-tumble
play and competitive sports and have little inte rest in stereotypically masculine toys (e.g.,
cars, trucks). Some may pretend not to have a penis and insist on sitting to urinate. More
454 Gender Dysphoria
rarely, they may state that they find their penis or testes disgusting, that they wish them re-
moved, or that they have, or wish to have, a vagina.
In young adolescents with gender dysphoria,  clinical features may resemble those of
children or adults with the co ndition, depending on develo pmental level. As secondary
sex characteristics of young adolescents are no t yet fully developed, these individuals may
not state dislike of them, but they are co ncerned about imminent physical changes. 
In adults with gender dysphoria, the di screpancy between experienced gender and
physical sex characteristics is often, but not always, accompanied by a desire to be rid of
primary and/or secondary sex ch aracteristics and/or a strong desire to acquire some pri-
mary and/or secondary sex characteristics of  the other gender. To varying degrees, adults
with gender dysphoria may ad opt the behavior, clothing, and mannerisms of the experi-
enced gender. They feel uncomfortable being re garded by others, or functioning in soci-
ety, as members of their assigned gender. Some adults may have a strong desire to be of a
different gender and treated as such, and they may have an inner certainty to feel and re-
spond as the experienced gender without seek ing medical treatment to alter body char-
acteristics. They may find other ways to resolve the incongruence between experienced/
expressed and assigned gender by partially livin g in the desired role or by adopting a gen-
der role neither conventionally male nor conventionally female.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
When visible signs of puberty develop, natal bo ys may shave their legs at the first signs of
hair growth. They sometimes bind their genitals to make erections less visible. Girls may
bind their breasts, walk with a stoop, or use lo ose sweaters to make breasts less visible. In-
creasingly, adolescents request, or may obta in without medical prescription and supervi-
sion, hormonal suppressors (“blockers”) of gonadal steroids (e.g., gonadotropin-releasing
hormone [GnRH] analog, spironolactone). Clinically refe rred adolescents often want hor-
mone treatment and many also wish for gender reassignment surgery. Adolescents living in
an accepting environment may open ly express the desire to be and be treated as the experi-
enced gender and dress partly or completely as the experienced gender, have a hairstyle typ-
ical of the experienced gender, preferentially s eek friendships with peer s of the other gender,
and/or adopt a new first name consistent with the experienced gender. Older adolescents,
when sexually active, usually do  not show or allow partners to touch their sexual organs. For
adults with an aversion toward their genitals, sexual activity is constrained by the preference
that their genitals not be seen  or touched by their partners. Some adults may seek hormone
treatment (sometimes without medical prescrip tion and supervision) and gender reassign-
ment surgery. Others are satisfied with either hormone treatment or surgery alone.
Adolescents and adults with gender dysphoria before gender reassignment are at in-
creased risk for suicidal ideation, suicide a ttempts, and suicides. After gender reassign-
ment, adjustment may vary, an d suicide risk may persist.
Prevalence 
For natal adult males, prevalence ranges from 0.005% to 0.014%, and for natal females,
from 0.002% to 0.003%. Since not all adults seeking hormone treatment and surgical reas-
signment attend specialty clinics, these rate s are likely modest underestimates. Sex differ-
ences in rate of referrals to specialty clinics vary by age group. In children, sex ratios of
natal boys to girls range from 2:1 to 4.5:1. In adolescents, the sex ratio is close to parity; in
adults, the sex ratio favors natal males, with ratios ranging from 1:1 to 6.1:1. In two coun-
tries, the sex ratio appears to favor nata l females (Japan: 2.2:1; Poland: 3.4:1). 
Development and Course 
Because expression of gender dysphoria varies wi th age, there are separate criteria sets for
children versus adolescents and adults. Criter ia for children are defined in a more con-
Gender Dysphoria 455
crete, behavioral manner than those for adolescents and adults. Many of the core criteria
draw on well-documented behavioral gender differences between typically developing
boys and girls. Young children are less likely than older children, ad olescents, and adults
to express extreme and persistent anatomic dysphoria. In adolescents and adults, incon-
gruence between experienced gender and somati c sex is a central feature of the diagnosis.
Factors related to distress and impairment al so vary with age. A very young child may
show signs of distress (e.g., intense crying) on ly when parents tell the child that he or she
is “really” not a member of the other gender but only “desires” to be. Distress may not be
manifest in social environments supportive of the child’s desire to live in the role of the
other gender and may emerge only if the desi re is interfered with. In adolescents and
adults, distress may manifest because of stro ng incongruence between experienced gender
and somatic sex. Such distress may, however, be mitigated by  supportive environments and
knowledge that biomedical treatments exist to reduce incongruence. Impairment (e.g.,
school refusal, development of  depression, anxiety, and substance abuse) may be a conse-
quence of gender dysphoria.
Gender dysphoria without a disorder of sex development. For clinic-referred children,
onset of cross-gender behaviors is usually betw een ages 2 and 4 years. This corresponds to
the developmental time period in which most  typically developing children begin ex-
pressing gendered behaviors and interests. For some preschool-age children, both perva-
sive cross-gender behaviors and the expressed desire to be the other gender may be
present, or, more rarely, labeling oneself as a member of the other gender may occur. In
some cases, the expressed desire to be the othe r gender appears later, usually at entry into
elementary school. A small minority of childre n express discomfort wi th their sexual anat-
omy or will state the desire to have a sexual anatomy correspondin g to the experienced
gender (“anatomic dysphoria”). Expressions of anatomic dysphoria become more com-
mon as children with ge nder dysphoria approach and anticipate puberty. 
Rates of persistence of gender dysphoria fr om childhood into adolescence or adulthood
vary. In natal males, persistence has ranged fr om 2.2% to 30%. In natal females, persistence
has ranged from 12% to 50%. Persistence of gender dysphoria is mo destly correlated with
dimensional measures of severity ascertaine d at the time of a childhood baseline assess-
ment. In one sample of natal males, lower socioeconomic background was also modestly
correlated with persistence. It is unclear if particular therapeutic approaches to gender
dysphoria in children are related to rates of  long-term persistence. Extant follow-up sam-
ples consisted of children receiving no formal  therapeutic interventi on or receiving ther-
apeutic interventions of various types, ranging from ac tive efforts to reduce gender
dysphoria to a more neutral, “watchful waiting” approach. It is unclear if children “en-
couraged” or supported to live socially in the desired gender will show  higher rates of per-
sistence, since such children have not yet b een followed longitudinally in a systematic
manner. For both natal male and female ch ildren showing persistence, almost all are
sexually attracted to individuals of their na tal sex. For natal male  children whose gender
dysphoria does not per sist, the majority are androphilic  (sexually attracted to males) and of-
ten self-identify as gay or homosexual (rangi ng from 63% to 100%). In natal female chil-
dren whose gender dysphoria does no t persist, the percentage who are gynephilic  (sexually
attracted to females) and sel f-identify as lesbian is lower (ranging from 32% to 50%).
In both adolescent and adult natal males, there are t wo broad trajectories for develop-
ment of gender dysphoria: early onset and late onset. Early-onset gender dysphoria  starts in
childhood and continues into adolescence and adulthood; or, there is an intermittent pe-
riod in which the gender dysphoria desists and these individuals self-i dentify as gay or ho-
mosexual, followed by recurren ce of gender dysphoria. Late-onset gender dysphoria  occurs
around puberty or much later in life. Some of these individuals report having had a desire
to be of the other gender in childhood that was not expressed verbally to others. Others do
not recall any signs of childhood gender dysp horia. For adolescent males with late-onset
gender dysphoria, parents often report surpri se because they did not see signs of gender
456 Gender Dysphoria
dysphoria during childhood. Expressions of anatomic dysphoria are more common and
salient in adolescents and adults once seco ndary sex characterist ics have developed. 
Adolescent and adult natal males with earl y-onset gender dysphoria are almost al-
ways sexually attracted to men (androphilic). Adolescents and adults with late-onset gen-
der dysphoria frequently engage in transves tic behavior with sexual excitement. The
majority of these individuals are gynephilic or  sexually attracted to other posttransition
natal males with late-onset ge nder dysphoria. A substantia l percentage of adult males
with late-onset gender dyspho ria cohabit with or are marrie d to natal females. After gen-
der transition, many self-identify as lesbian. Among adult natal males with gender dyspho-
ria, the early-onset group seeks out clinical  care for hormone treatment and reassignment
surgery at an earlier age than does the late-onset group. The late-onset group may have more
fluctuations in the degree of gender dyspho ria and be more ambivalent about and less
likely satisfied after gender  reassignment surgery. 
In both adolescent and adult natal females, the most common  course is the early-onset
form of gender dysphoria. The late-onset fo rm is much less common in natal females com-
pared with natal males. As in natal males with gender dysphoria, there may have been a
period in which the gender dysphoria desisted and these individuals self-identified as les-
bian; however, with recurrence of gender dysphoria, clinical consultation is sought, often
with the desire for hormone treatment and reas signment surgery. Parents of natal adoles-
cent females with the late-onset form also report surprise, as no signs of childhood gender
dysphoria were evident. Expressions of anat omic dysphoria are mu ch more common and
salient in adolescents and adults than in children.
Adolescent and adult natal females with early-onset gender dysphoria are almost
always gynephilic. Adolescents and adults with  the late-onset form of gender dysphoria
are usually androphilic and after gender transit ion self-identify as gay men. Natal females
with the late-onset form do not have co-occu rring transvestic behavi or with sexual ex-
citement. 
Gender dysphoria in association with a disorder of sex development. Most individuals
with a disorder of sex development who develop gender dysphoria have already come to
medical attention at an early age. For many, st arting at birth, issues of gender assignment
were raised by physicians and parents. More over, as infertility is quite common for this
group, physicians are more willing to perfor m cross-sex hormone treatments and genital
surgery before adulthood.
Disorders of sex development in general are frequently as sociated with gender-atypi-
cal behavior starting in early childhood. Howeve r, in the majority of cases, this does not
lead to gender dysphoria. As individuals with a disorder of sex development become
aware of their medical history and condition, many experience uncertainty about their
gender, as opposed to developing a firm co nviction that they are another gender. How-
ever, most do not progress to gender transit ion. Gender dysphoria and gender transition
may vary considerably as a function of a disord er of sex development, its severity, and as-
signed gender. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. For individuals with gender dyspho ria without a disorder of sex de-
velopment, atypical gender behavior among individuals with early-onset gender dyspho-
ria develops in early preschool age, and it is possible that a high degree of atypicality
makes the development of gender dysphoria and its persistence into adolescence and
adulthood more likely.
Environmental. Among individuals with gender dysphoria without a disorder of sex de-
velopment, males with gender dysphoria (in both childhood and adolescence) more com-
monly have older brothers than do males without the condition. Additional predisposing
Gender Dysphoria 457
factors under consideration, especially in indi viduals with late-onset gender dysphoria (ad-
olescence, adulthood), include habitual fetishistic transvesti sm developing into autogyne-
philia (i.e., sexual arousal asso ciated with the thought or imag e of oneself as  a woman) and
other forms of more general social, psychological, or developmental problems.
Genetic and physiological. For individuals with gender dy sphoria without a disorder of
sex development, some genetic contribution is suggested by evidence for (weak) familial-
ity of transsexualism among nontwin siblings, increased concordance for transsexualism
in monozygotic compared with dizygotic same -sex twins, and some degree of heritability
of gender dysphoria. As to endocrine findin gs, no endogenous systemic abnormalities in
sex-hormone levels have been found in 46,XY individuals, whereas there appear to be in-
creased androgen levels (in the range found in hirsute women but far below normal male
levels) in 46,XX individuals. Overall, current evidence is insufficient to label gender dys-
phoria without a disorder of sex development as  a form of intersexuality limited to the cen-
tral nervous system.
In gender dysphoria associated with a disorder of sex development, the likelihood of
later gender dysphoria is increased if pren atal production and utilization (via receptor
sensitivity) of androgens are grossly atypical re lative to what is usually seen in individuals
with the same assigned gender. Examples incl ude 46,XY individuals with a history of nor-
mal male prenatal hormone milieu but inborn nonhormonal genital defects (as in cloacal
bladder exstrophy or penile agenesis) and who have been assigned to the female gender.
The likelihood of gender dysphoria is furthe r enhanced by additional, prolonged, highly
gender-atypical postnatal androgen exposure with somatic virilization as may occur in fe-
male-raised and noncastrated 46,XY individu als with 5-alpha reductase-2 deficiency or
17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrog enase-3 deficiency or in female-raised 46,XX individuals
with classical congenital adrenal hyperplasi a with prolonged periods of non-adherence to
glucocorticoid replacement therapy. Howeve r, the prenatal androgen milieu is more
closely related to gendered behavior than to gender identity. Many individuals with dis-
orders of sex development and markedly gend er-atypical behavior do not develop gender
dysphoria. Thus, gender-atypical behavior by itself should not be interpreted as an indi-
cator of current or future gend er dysphoria. There appears to be a higher rate of gender
dysphoria and patient-initiated gender change from assigned female to male than from as-
signed male to female in 46,XY individu als with a disorder of sex development.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Individuals with gender dysphoria have be en reported across many countries and cul-
tures. The equivalent of gender dysphoria ha s also been reported in individuals living in
cultures with institutionalized gender categories other than ma le or female. It is unclear
whether with these individuals the diagnostic criteria for gender dysphoria would be met.
Diagnostic Markers 
Individuals with a somatic disorder of sex development show some correlation of final
gender identity outcome with the degree of prenatal androgen production and utilization.
However, the correlation is not robust enough for the biological factor, where ascertain-
able, to replace a detailed an d comprehensive diagnostic in terview evaluation for gender
dysphoria. 
Functional Consequences  of Gender Dysphoria
Preoccupation with cross-gender wishes may de velop at all ages after the first 2–3 years of
childhood and often interfere with daily activities. In older children, failure to develop
age-typical same-sex peer relationships and skills may lead to isolation from peer groups
and to distress. Some children may refuse to attend school because of teasing and harass-
458 Gender Dysphoria
ment or pressure to dress in attire associated  with their assigned sex. Also in adolescents
and adults, preoccupation with cross-gender w ishes often interferes with daily activities.
Relationship difficulties, including sexual relationship problems, are common, and func-
tioning at school or at work may be impa ired. Gender dysphoria, along with atypical
gender expression, is associated with high le vels of stigmatization , discrimination, and
victimization, leading to nega tive self-concept, increased ra tes of mental disorder comor-
bidity, school dropout, and economic marginalization, including unemployment, with at-
tendant social and mental health risks, especially in individuals from resource-poor family
backgrounds. In addition, these individuals’ access to health services and mental health
services may be impeded by structural barriers,  such as institutional discomfort or inex-
perience in working with this patient population.
Differential Diagnosis
Nonconformity to gender roles. Gender dysphoria should be distinguished from sim-
ple nonconformity to stereotypical gender role behavior by the strong desire to be of an-
other gender than the assigned one and by th e extent and pervasivene ss of gender-variant
activities and interests. The diagnosis is not meant to mere ly describe nonconformity to
stereotypical gender role behavior (e.g., “t omboyism” in girls, “girly-boy” behavior in
boys, occasional cross-dressing in adult men). Given the increased openness of atypical
gender expressions by individuals across the entire range of the transgender spectrum, it
is important that the clinical diagnosis be lim ited to those individuals whose distress and
impairment meet the specified criteria.
Transvestic disorder. Transvestic disorder occurs in he terosexual (or bisexual) adoles-
cent and adult males (rarely in females) fo r whom cross-dressing behavior generates sex-
ual excitement and causes distress and/or  impairment without drawing their primary
gender into question. It is occasionally ac companied by gender dysphoria. An individual
with transvestic disorder who also has clinica lly significant gender dysphoria can be given
both diagnoses. In many cases of late-onset  gender dysphoria in gynephilic natal males,
transvestic behavior with sexu al excitement is a precursor.
Body dysmorphic disorder. An individual with body dy smorphic disorder focuses on
the alteration or removal of a sp ecific body part because it is perceived as abnormally formed,
not because it represents a repudiated assign ed gender. When an individual’s presenta-
tion meets criteria for both gender dysphori a and body dysmorphic disorder, both diag-
noses can be given. Individuals wishing to  have a healthy limb amputated (termed by
some body integrity identity disorder) because it makes them feel more “complete” usually
do not wish to change gender, but rather desi re to live as an amput ee or a disabled person.
Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. In schizophrenia, there may rarely be
delusions of belonging to some  other gender. In the absence of psychotic symptoms, in-
sistence by an individual with gender dysphori a that he or she is of some other gender is
not considered a delusion. Schizophrenia (or other psychotic disorders) and gender dys-
phoria may co-occur.
Other clinical presentations. Some individuals with an emasculinization desire who
develop an alternative, nonmale/nonfemale ge nder identity do have  a presentation that
meets criteria for gender dys phoria. However, some males seek castration and/or penec-
tomy for aesthetic reasons or to remove psychological effects of androgens without chang-
ing male identity; in these cases, the cr iteria for gender dysphoria are not met. 
Comorbidity 
Clinically referred children with gender dysphoria show elevated le vels of emotional and
behavioral problems—most commonly, anxiety, disruptive and impulse-control, and de-
Other Specified Gender Dysphoria 459
pressive disorders. In prepub ertal children, increasing age is associated with having more
behavioral or emotional problems; this is rela ted to the increasing non-acceptance of gen-
der-variant behavior by others. In older chil dren, gender-variant behavior often leads to
peer ostracism, which may lead to more be havioral problems. The prevalence of mental
health problems differs among cultures; these differences may also be  related to differences
in attitudes toward gender variance in child ren. However, also in  some non-Western cul-
tures, anxiety has been found to be relatively  common in individuals with gender dysphoria,
even in cultures with accepting attitudes to ward gender-variant be havior. Autism spec-
trum disorder is more prevalent in clinica lly referred children with gender dysphoria than
in the general population. Clinically referred adolescents with gender dysphoria appear to
have comorbid mental disorders, with anxi ety and depressive disorders being the most
common. As in children, autism spectrum disorder is more pr evalent in clinically referred
adolescents with gender dysphoria than in the general population. Clinically referred
adults with gender dysphoria may have coexisting mental he alth problems, most commonly
anxiety and depres sive disorders.
Other Specified Gender Dysphoria
302.6 (F64.8)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of gender dys-
phoria that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for gender dys-
phoria. The other specified gender dysphoria category is used in situations in which the
clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet
the criteria for gender dysphoria. This is done by recording “other specified gender dys-
phoria” followed by the specific r eason (e.g., “brief gender dysphoria”).
An example of a presentation that can be specified using the “other specified” desig-
nation is the following:
The current disturbance meets symptom cr iteria for gender dysphoria, but the
duration is less than 6 months.
Unspecified Gender Dysphoria
302.6 (F64.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of gender dys-
phoria that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or oth-
er important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for gender
dysphoria. The unspecified gender dysphoria category is used in situations in which the
clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for gender dyspho-
ria, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more
specific diagnosis.
This page intentionally left blank 