709Medication-Induced Movement
Disorders and Other Adverse
Effects of Medication
Medication-induced  movement disorders are included in Section II because of
their frequent importance in 1)  the management by medication of mental disorders or oth-
er medical conditions and 2) the differential diagnosis of mental disorders (e.g., anxiety
disorder versus neuroleptic-induced akathisi a; malignant catatonia versus neuroleptic
malignant syndrome). Although these moveme nt disorders are labeled “medication in-
duced,” it is often difficult to establish the causal relationship between medication expo-
sure and the development of the movement di sorder, especially because some of these
movement disorders also occu r in the absence of medicati on exposure. The conditions
and problems listed in this ch apter are not mental disorders.
The term neuroleptic  is becoming outdated because it highlights the propensity of an-
tipsychotic medications to cause abnormal movements, and it is being replaced with the
term antipsychotic  in many contexts. Nevertheless, the term neuroleptic remains appropri-
ate in this context. Although newer antipsychotic medications may be less likely to cause
some medication-induced move ment disorders, those disorders still occur. Neuroleptic
medications include so-called conventional, “t ypical,” or first-gene ration antipsychotic
agents (e.g., chlorpromazine, haloperidol, fl uphenazine); “atypical” or second-generation
antipsychotic agents (e.g., clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine); certain dopa-
mine receptor–blocking drugs used in the tr eatment of symptoms such as nausea and gas-
troparesis (e.g., prochlorperazine, prometh azine, trimethobenzamide, thiethylperazine,
metoclopramide); and amoxapine, which is marketed as an antidepressant.
Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism
Other Medication-Induced Parkinsonism
332.1 (G21.11) Neuroleptic-Induced Parkinsonism
332.1 (G21.19) Other Medication-Induced Parkinsonism
Parkinsonian tremor, muscular rigidity, akinesia (i.e., loss of movement or difficulty ini-
tiating movement), or bradykinesia (i.e., slowing movement) developing within a few
weeks of starting or raising the dosage of a me dication (e.g., a neuroleptic) or after reduc-
ing the dosage of a medication used  to treat extrapyramidal symptoms.
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
333.92 (G21.0) Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Although neuroleptic malignant syndrome is easily recognized in its classic full-blown
form, it is often heterogeneous in onset, pres entation, progression, and outcome. The clin-
ical features described below are those consid ered most important in making the diagno-
sis of neuroleptic malignant syndrome  based on consensus recommendations.
710 Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
Diagnostic Features
Patients have generally been exposed to a dopamine antagonist within 72 hours prior to
symptom development. Hyperthermia ( 100.4 F or 38.0C on at least two occasions,
measured orally), associated with profuse dia phoresis, is a distinguishing feature of neu-
roleptic malignant syndrome, sett ing it apart from other neurol ogical side effects of anti-
psychotic medications. Extreme elevations in temperature, reflecting a breakdown in
central thermoregulation, are more likely to support the diagnosis of neuroleptic malig-
nant syndrome. Generalized rigidity, described as “lead pipe” in its most severe form and
usually unresponsive to antiparkinsonian agen ts, is a cardinal feature of the disorder and
may be associated with other neurological symptoms (e.g., tremor, sialorrhea, akinesia,
dystonia, trismus, myoclonus,  dysarthria, dysphagia, rhab domyolysis). Creatine kinase
elevation of at least four times the upper limit of normal is commonly seen. Changes in
mental status, characterized by  delirium or altered consciousness ranging from stupor to
coma, are often an early sign. Affected indi viduals may appear alert but dazed and unre-
sponsive, consistent with catatonic stupor. Autonomic activation and instability—mani-
fested by tachycardia (rate 25% above baseline), diaphoresis, blood pressure elevation
(systolic or diastolic 25% above baseline) or fluctuation ( 20 mmHg diastolic change or
25 mmHg systolic change within 24 hours), urinary incontinence, and pallor—may be
seen at any time but provide an early clue to the diagnosis. Tachypnea (rate 50% above
baseline) is common, and respiratory distress —resulting from metabolic acidosis, hyper-
metabolism, chest wall restriction, aspiration pneumonia, or pulmonary emboli—can oc-
cur and lead to sudden respiratory arrest.
A workup, including laboratory investigation,  to exclude other infectious, toxic, met-
abolic, and neuropsychiatric et iologies or complications is essential (see the section “Dif-
ferential Diagnosis” later in this discussion ). Although several laboratory abnormalities
are associated with neuroleptic malignant synd rome, no single abnormality is specific to
the diagnosis. Individuals with neuroleptic malignant syndrome may have leukocytosis,
metabolic acidosis, hypoxia, decreased serum iron concentrations, and elevations in se-
rum muscle enzymes and catecholamines. Findings from cerebrospinal fluid analysis and
neuroimaging studies are generally normal, whereas electroencephalography shows gen-
eralized slowing. Autopsy findings in fatal ca ses have been nonspecific and variable, de-
pending on complications.
Development and Course
Evidence from database studies suggests in cidence rates for neuroleptic malignant syn-
drome of 0.01%–0.02% among indi viduals treated with antips ychotics. The temporal pro-
gression of signs and symptoms provides important clues to the diagnosis and prognosis
of neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Alteration  in mental status and other neurological
signs typically precede systemic signs. The on set of symptoms varies from hours to days
after drug initiation. Some cases develop with in 24 hours after drug initiation, most within
the first week, and virtually all cases within 30 days. Once the syndrome is diagnosed and
oral antipsychotic drugs are d iscontinued, neuroleptic maligna nt syndrome is self-limited
in most cases. The mean reco very time after drug discontinuation is 7–10 days, with most
individuals recovering within 1 week and nearly all within 30 days. The duration may be
prolonged when long-acting antipsychotics are implicated. There have been reports of in-
dividuals in whom residual neurological signs persisted for weeks after the acute hyper-
metabolic symptoms re solved. Total resolution of symp toms can be obtained in most
cases of neuroleptic malignant syndrome; howe ver, fatality rates of 10%–20% have been
reported when the disorder is not recogniz ed. Although many individuals do not experi-
ence a recurrence of neuroleptic malignant syndrome when rechallenged with antipsy-
chotic medication, some do, especially when antipsychotics are reinstituted soon after an
episode.
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders 711
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Neuroleptic malignant sy ndrome is a potential risk in an y individual after antipsychotic
drug administration. It is not specific to an y neuropsychiatric diagnosis and may occur in
individuals without a diagnosable mental disorder who receive dopamine antagonists.
Clinical, systemic, and metabolic factors associ ated with a heightened risk of neuroleptic
malignant syndrome include agitation, exhaus tion, dehydration, and iron deficiency. A
prior episode associated with antipsychotics has been described in 15%–20% of index
cases, suggesting underlying vulnerability in  some patients; however, genetic findings
based on neurotransmitter receptor polymorphi sms have not been replicated consistently.
Nearly all dopamine antagonists have been associated with neuroleptic malignant
syndrome, although high-potency antipsychotics  pose a greater risk compared with low-
potency agents and newer atypical antipsychoti cs. Partial or milder forms may be associ-
ated with newer antipsychotics, but neurolep tic malignant syndrome  varies in severity
even with older drugs. Dopami ne antagonists used in medical settings (e.g., metoclopra-
mide, prochlorperazine) have also been impl icated. Parenteral administration routes,
rapid titration rates, and higher total drug dosages have been associated with increased
risk; however, neuroleptic malignant syndrome  usually occurs within the therapeutic dos-
age range of antipsychotics.
Differential Diagnosis
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome must be di stinguished from other serious neurological
or medical conditions, including central nerv ous system infections, inflammatory or au-
toimmune conditions, status ep ilepticus, subcortical structur al lesions, and systemic con-
ditions (e.g., pheochromocytoma, thyrotoxicosis, tetanu s, heat stroke).
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome also must  be distinguished from similar syndromes
resulting from the use of other substances or medications, such as serotonin syndrome;
parkinsonian hyperthermia syndrome following abrupt discontinuation of dopamine ag-
onists; alcohol or sedative withdrawal; malignant hyperthe rmia occurring during anes-
thesia; hyperthermia associated with abuse of stimulants and hallucinogens; and atropine
poisoning from anticholinergics.
In rare instances, individuals with schizophrenia or a mood diso rder may present with
malignant catatonia, which ma y be indistinguishable from neuroleptic malignant syn-
drome. Some investigators consider neurol eptic malignant syndrome to be a drug-
induced form of malignant catatonia.
Medication-Induced Acute Dystonia
333.72 (G24.02) Medication-Induced Acute Dystonia
Abnormal and prolonged contract ion of the muscles of the ey es (oculogyric crisis), head,
neck (torticollis or retrocollis), limbs, or trunk developing within a few days of starting or
raising the dosage of a medication (such as a neuroleptic) or after reducing the dosage of a
medication used to treat extrapyramidal symptoms.
Medication-Induced Acute Akathisia
333.99 (G25.71) Medication-Induced Acute Akathisia
Subjective complaints of restlessness, ofte n accompanied by observed excessive move-
ments (e.g., fidgety movements of  the legs, rocking from foot to  foot, pacing, inability to sit
or stand still), developing within a few weeks of starting or raising the dosage of a medi-
cation (such as a neuroleptic) or after reducing the dosage of a medication used to treat ex-
trapyramidal symptoms.
712 Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
Tardive Dyskinesia
333.85 (G24.01) Tardive Dyskinesia
Involuntary athetoid or chorei form movements (lasting at le ast a few weeks) generally of
the tongue, lower face and jaw, and extremit ies (but sometimes involving the pharyngeal,
diaphragmatic, or trunk muscles) developing in association with the use of a neuroleptic
medication for at least a few months.
Symptoms may develop after a shorter period  of medication use in older persons. In
some patients, movements of this type may ap pear after discontinuation, or after change
or reduction in dosage, of neuroleptic medica tions, in which case the condition is called
neuroleptic withdrawal -emergent dyskinesia.  Because withdrawal-emergent dyskinesia is
usually time-limited, lasting less than 4–8 week s, dyskinesia that persists beyond this win-
dow is considered to be tardive dyskinesia.
Tardive Dystonia
Tardive Akathisia
333.72 (G24.09) Tardive Dystonia
333.99 (G25.71) Tardive Akathisia
Tardive syndrome involving other types of movement problems, such as dystonia or
akathisia, which are distinguished by their late  emergence in the course of treatment and
their potential persistence for months to years,  even in the face of neuroleptic discontinu-
ation or dosage reduction.
Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
333.1 (G25.1) Medication-Induced Postural Tremor
Fine tremor (usually in the range of 8–12 Hz) occurring during attempts to maintain a pos-
ture and developing in associ ation with the use of medicati on (e.g., lithium, antidepres-
sants, valproate). This tremor is very similar to the tremor seen with anxiety, caffeine, and
other stimulants.
Other Medication-Induced Movement Disorder
333.99 (G25.79) Other Medication-Induced Movement Disorder
This category is for medication-induced movement disorders not captured by any of the
specific disorders listed above.  Examples include 1) presentations resembling neuroleptic
malignant syndrome that are associated with  medications other than neuroleptics and
2) other medication-induc ed tardive conditions.
Antidepressant Discontinuation Syndrome
995.29 ( T43.205A )Initial encounter
995.29 ( T43.205D )Subsequent encounter 
995.29 ( T43.205S )Sequelae
Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome is a set of symptoms that can occur after an
abrupt cessation (or marked re duction in dose) of an antide pressant medication that was
taken continuously for at least 1 month. Symp toms generally begin within 2–4 days and
typically include specific sensory, somatic,  and cognitive-emotional manifestations. Fre-
Medication-Induced Movement Disorders 713
quently reported sensory and somatic symptoms  include flashes of lights, “electric shock”
sensations, nausea, and hyperre sponsivity to nois es or lights. Nons pecific anxiety and
feelings of dread may also be reported. Symptoms are alleviated by restarting the same
medication or starting a different medication that has a similar mechanism of action—
for example, discontinuation symptoms afte r withdrawal from a serotonin-norepineph-
rine reuptake inhibitor may be alleviated by starting a tricyclic antidepressant. To qualify
as antidepressant discontinuation syndrome, the symptoms should not have been present
before the antidepressant dosa ge was reduced and are not be tter explained by another
mental disorder (e.g., manic or hypomanic episode, substance intoxication, substance
withdrawal, somatic symptom disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Discontinuation symptoms may occur following treatment with tricyclic antidepressants
(e.g., imipramine, amitriptyline, desipramine) , serotonin reuptake in hibitors (e.g., fluox-
etine, paroxetine, sertraline), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (e.g., phenelzine, selegi-
line, pargyline). The incidence of this syndrome  depends on the dosage and half-life of the
medication being taken, as well as the rate at  which the medication is tapered. Short-acting
medications that are stopped ab ruptly rather than tapered gradually may pose the great-
est risk. The short-acting selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) paroxetine is the
agent most commonly associated with disconti nuation symptoms, but such symptoms oc-
cur for all types of antidepressants.
Unlike withdrawal syndromes associated with  opioids, alcohol, and other substances
of abuse, antidepressant discontinuation sy ndrome has no pathognomonic symptoms. In-
stead, the symptoms tend to be vague and variable and typically begin 2–4 days after the
last dose of the antidepressant. For SSRIs (e.g., paroxetine), symptoms such as dizziness,
ringing in the ears, “electric shocks in the head ,” an inability to sleep, and acute anxiety are
described. The antidepressant use prior to discontinuation must not have incurred hypo-
mania or euphoria (i.e., there should be confidence that the discontinuation syndrome is
not the result of fluctuations in mood stabi lity associated with the previous treatment).
The antidepressant discontinuation syndrome is based solely on pharmacological factors
and is not related to the reinforcing effects of an antidepressant. Also, in the case of stim-
ulant augmentation of an antidepressant, abru pt cessation may result in stimulant with-
drawal symptoms (see “Stimulant Withdraw al” in the chapter “Substance-Related and
Addictive Disorders”) rather than the antide pressant discontinuation syndrome described
here.
Prevalence
The prevalence of antidepressant discontinu ation syndrome is unknown but is thought to
vary according to the dosage prior to discon tinuation, the half-life and receptor-binding
affinity of the medication, and possibly the indi vidual’s genetically influenced rate of me-
tabolism for this medication.
Course and Development
Because longitudinal studies are lacking, little is known about the clinical course of anti-
depressant discontinuation syndrome. Sympto ms appear to abate over time with very
gradual dosage reductions. After an episode, some individuals may pr efer to resume med-
ication indefinitely if tolerated.
Differential Diagnosis
The differential diagnosis of antidepressant discontinuation syndrome includes anxiety
and depressive disorders, su bstance use disorders, and tolerance to medications.
714 Medication-Induced Movement Disorders
Anxiety and depressive disorders. Discontinuation symptoms often resemble symptoms
of a persistent anxiety disorder  or a return of somatic symptoms of depression for which
the medication was initially given.
Substance use disorders. Antidepressant discontinuatio n syndrome differs from sub-
stance withdrawal in that antidepressants th emselves have no reinforcing or euphoric ef-
fects. The medication dosage has usually not been increased without the clinician’s
permission, and the individual generally does no t engage in drug-seeking behavior to ob-
tain additional medication. Criteria for a substance use disorder are not met.
Tolerance to medications. Tolerance and discontinuation symptoms can occur as a
normal physiological response to stopping medication after a substantial duration of
exposure. Most cases of medication tolerance can be managed through carefully con-
trolled tapering.
Comorbidity
Typically, the individual was initially started on the medication for a major depressive dis-
order; the original symptoms may return  during the discontinuation syndrome.
Other Adverse Effect of Medication
995.20 ( T50.905A )Initial encounter
995.20 ( T50.905D )Subsequent encounter 
995.20 ( T50.905S )Sequelae
This category is available for optional use by clinicians to code side effects of medication
(other than movement symptoms) when these ad verse effects become a main focus of clin-
ical attention. Examples include severe hypotension, cardia c arrhythmias, and priapism.