31Neurodevelopmental
Disorders
The neurodevelopmental  disorders are a group of co nditions with onset in the
developmental period. The diso rders typically manifest early in development, often be-
fore the child enters grade school, and are characterized by developmental deficits that
produce impairments of person al, social, academic, or occupational functioning. The
range of developmental deficits varies from very  specific limitations of  learning or control
of executive functions to glob al impairments of social skills  or intelligence. The neurode-
velopmental disorders frequent ly co-occur; for example, in dividuals with autism spec-
trum disorder often have intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), and
many children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) also have a specific
learning disorder. For some diso rders, the clinical presentation includes symptoms of ex-
cess as well as deficits and delays in achiev ing expected milestones. For example, autism
spectrum disorder is diagnose d only when the characteristic deficits of social communi-
cation are accompanied by excessively repetitive  behaviors, restricted interests, and insis-
tence on sameness. 
Intellectual disability (intel lectual developmental disorder) is characterized by deficits
in general mental abilities, such as reasoning, problem solving, planning, abstract thinking,
judgment, academic learning, and learning from experience. The deficits result in impair-
ments of adaptive functioning, such that the individual fails to meet standards of personal
independence and social responsibility in one or more aspects of daily life, including com-
munication, social participation, academic or occupational functionin g, and personal inde-
pendence at home or in community settings . Global developmental delay, as its name
implies, is diagnosed when an individual fa ils to meet expected developmental milestones
in several areas of intellectual functioning. The diagnosis is used for individuals who are
unable to undergo systematic assessments of intellectual functioning, including children
who are too young to participate in standardiz ed testing. Intellectual disability may result
from an acquired insult during the developm ental period from, for example, a severe head
injury, in which case a neurocognitive disorder also may be diagnosed.
The communication disorders include language disorder, speech sound disorder, so-
cial (pragmatic) communication  disorder, and childhood-onset fluency disorder (stutter-
ing). The first three disorders are characterize d by deficits in the development and use of
language, speech, and social communication, respectively. Childhood -onset fluency dis-
order is characterized by disturbances of the normal fluency an d motor production of
speech, including repetitive sounds or syllables, prolongation of consonants or vowel
sounds, broken words, blocking, or words pr oduced with an exce ss of physical tension.
Like other neurodevelopmental  disorders, communication di sorders begin early in life
and may produce lifelong functional impairments.
Autism spectrum disorder is characterized by  persistent deficits in social communica-
tion and social interaction across multiple cont exts, including deficits in social reciprocity,
nonverbal communicative behavior s used for social interaction, and skills in developing,
maintaining, and understandin g relationships. In addition  to the social communication
deficits, the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder requires th e presence of restricted, re-
petitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities. Because symptoms change with de-
velopment and may be masked by compensator y mechanisms, the diagnostic criteria may
32 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
be met based on historical information, although the current presentation must cause sig-
nificant impairment.
Within the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder, individual clinical characteristics
are noted through the use of specifiers (with or without accompanying intellectual impair-
ment; with or without accompan ying structural language im pairment; associated with a
known medical/genetic or environmental/acquired condition; associated with another
neurodevelopmental, mental, or behavioral disorder), as well as specifiers that describe
the autistic symptoms (age at first concern; wi th or without loss of established skills; sever-
ity). These specifiers provide clinicians with an opportunity to individualize the diagnosis
and communicate a richer clinical description of  the affected individuals. For example, many
individuals previously diagnosed with Asperg er’s disorder would now receive a diagnosis
of autism spectrum disorder without language or intellectual impairment.
ADHD is a neurodevelopmental disorder defined by impairing levels of inattention, dis-
organization, and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity. Inattention and disorganization entail inabil-
ity to stay on task, seeming not to listen, and lo sing materials, at leve ls that are inconsistent
with age or developmental level.  Hyperactivity-impulsivity entails  overactivity, fidgeting, in-
ability to stay seated, intruding into other people’s activities , and inability to wait—symptoms
that are excessive for age or developmental level. In childhood, ADHD frequently overlaps
with disorders that are often considered to be “externalizing disorders,” such as oppositional
defiant disorder and conduct di sorder. ADHD often persists in to adulthood, with resultant
impairments of social, academic and occupational functioning.
The neurodevelopmental motor disorders in clude developmental coordination disor-
der, stereotypic movement disorder, and tic disorders. Developmen tal coordination dis-
order is characterized by deficits in the acquisition and execution of coordinated motor
skills and is manifested by clumsiness and slow ness or inaccuracy of performance of mo-
tor skills that cause interference with activiti es of daily living. St ereotypic movement dis-
order is diagnosed when an individual has repetitive, seemingly driven, and apparently
purposeless motor behaviors, such as hand fl apping, body rocking, head banging, self-
biting, or hitting. The movements interfere with  social, academic, or other activities. If the
behaviors cause self-injury, this  should be specified as part of the diagnostic description.
Tic disorders are characterized by the presen ce of motor or vocal tics, which are sudden,
rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic, sterotyped motor movements or vocalizations. The dura-
tion, presumed etiology, and clinical presentation  define the specific tic disorder that is di-
agnosed: Tourette’s disorder, persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, provisional
tic disorder, other specified tic disorder, and unspecified tic disorder . Tourette’s disorder
is diagnosed when the individual has multiple motor and vocal tics that have been present
for at least 1 year and that have  a waxing-waning symptom course.
Specific learning disorder, as the name implie s, is diagnosed when there are specific defi-
cits in an individual’s ability to perceive or process information efficiently and accurately. This
neurodevelopmental disorder first manifests during the years of formal schooling and is
characterized by persistent and impairing diffi culties with learning foundational academic
skills in reading, writing, and/ or math. The individual’s perfor mance of the affected academic
skills is well below average for age, or acceptable performance levels are achieved only with
extraordinary effort. Specific learning disorder may occur in individuals identified as intellec-
tually gifted and manifest only when the le arning demands or assessment procedures (e.g.,
timed tests) pose barriers that cannot be overcome by their innate intelligence and c ompensa-
tory strategies. For all individuals, specific le arning disorder can produce lifelong impairments
in activities dependent on the skills , including occupational performance.
The use of specifiers for the neurodevelopme ntal disorder diagnoses enriches the clin-
ical description of the individual’s clinical  course and current symptomatology. In addi-
tion to specifiers that describe the clinical presentation, such as age at onset or severity
ratings, the neurodevelopmental disorders ma y include the specifier “associated with a
known medical or genetic condition or environmental factor.” This specifier gives clini-
Intellectual Disability (Intellectual Developmental Disorder) 33
cians an opportunity to document factors that may have played a role in the etiology of the
disorder, as well as those that might affect the clinical course. Examples include genetic
disorders, such as fragile X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, and Rett syndrome; medical con-
ditions such as epilepsy; and environmental fa ctors, including very low birth weight and
fetal alcohol exposure (even in the absence of stigmata of fetal alcohol syndrome).
Intellectual Disabilities
Intellectual Disability
 (Intellectual Developmental Disorder)
Diagnostic Criteria
Intellectual disability (intellectual development al disorder) is a disorder with onset during
the developmental period that includes both intellectual and adaptive functioning deficits
in conceptual, social, and practical domains. The following three criteria must be met:
A. Deficits in intellectual functions, such as reasoning, problem solving, planning, abstract
thinking, judgment, academic learning, and learning from experience, confirmed by
both clinical assessment and individualized, standardized intelligence testing.
B. Deficits in adaptive functioning that result in failure to meet developmental and socio-
cultural standards for personal independence and social responsibility. Without ongo-
ing support, the adaptive deficits limit functioning in one or more activities of daily life,
such as communication, social participation, and independent living, across multiple
environments, such as home, school, work, and community.
C. Onset of intellectual and adaptive deficits during the developmental period.
Note:  The diagnostic term intellectual disability  is the equivalent term for the ICD-11 diag-
nosis of intellectual developmental disorders.  Although the term intellectual disability  is
used throughout this manual, both terms are used in the title to clarify relationships with
other classification systems. Moreover, a federal statute in the United States (Public Law
111-256, Rosa’s Law) replaces the term mental retardation with intellectual disability,  and
research journals use the term intellectual disability. Thus, intellectual disability  is the
term in common use by medical, educational, and other professions and by the lay public
and advocacy groups.
Specify current severity (see Table 1): 
317 (F70)    Mild
318.0 (F71) Moderate
318.1 (F72) Severe
318.2 (F73) Profound
Specifiers
The various levels of severity are defined on the basis of adaptive functioning, and not IQ
scores, because it is adaptive  functioning that determines the level of supports required.
Moreover, IQ measures ar e less valid in the lower end of the IQ range. 
34 Neurodevelopmental DisordersTABLE 1 Severity levels for intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder)
Severity 
level Conceptual domain Social domain Practical domain
Mild For preschool children, there 
may be no obvious conceptual 
differences. Fo r school-age 
children and adults, there are 
difficulties in learning aca-
demic skills involving reading, 
writing, arithmetic, time, or 
money, with support needed 
in one or more areas to meet 
age-related expectations. In 
adults, abstract thinking, exec-
utive function (i.e., planning, 
strategizing, priority setting, 
and cognitive flexibility), and 
short-term memory, as well as 
functional use of academic 
skills (e.g., reading, money 
management), are impaired. 
There is a somewhat concrete 
approach to problems and 
solutions compared with 
age-mates. Compared with typically developing age-
mates, the individual is immature in social 
interactions. For example, there may be diffi-
culty in accurately perceiving peers’ social 
cues. Communication, conversation, and lan-
guage are more concrete or immature than 
expected for age. There may be difficulties reg-
ulating emotion and behavior in age-appropri-
ate fashion; these difficulties are noticed by 
peers in social situations. There is limited 
understanding of risk in social situations; 
social judgment is immature for age, and 
the person is at risk of being manipulated 
by others (gullibility).The individual may functi on age-appropriately in 
personal care. Individuals need some support with 
complex daily living tasks in comparison to peers. In 
adulthood, supports typicall y involve grocery shop-
ping, transportation, home  and child-care organiz-
ing, nutritious food preparation, and banking and 
money management. Recreati onal skills resemble 
those of age-mates, although judgment related to 
well-being and organization around recreation 
requires support. In adulthood, competitive 
employment is often seen in  jobs that do not empha-
size conceptual skills. Individuals generally need 
support to make health care decisions and legal 
decisions, and to learn to perform a skilled vocation 
competently. Support is typically needed to raise a 
family.
Intellectual Disability (Intellectual Developmental Disorder) 35Moderate All through development, the 
individual’s conceptual skills 
lag markedly behind those of 
peers. For preschoolers, lan-
guage and pre-academic skills 
develop slowly. For school-age 
children, progress in reading, 
writing, mathematics, and 
understanding of time and 
money occurs slowly across 
the school years and is mark-
edly limited compared with 
that of peers. For adults, aca-
demic skill development is 
typically at an elementary 
level, and support is required 
for all use of academic skills in 
work and personal life. Ongo-
ing assistance on a daily basis 
is needed to complete concep-
tual tasks of day-to-day life, 
and others may take over these 
responsibilities fully for the 
individual.The individual shows marked differences from 
peers in social and communicative behavior 
across development. Spoken language is typi-
cally a primary tool for social communication 
but is much less complex than that of peers. 
Capacity for relationships is evident in ties to 
family and friends, and the individual may 
have successful friendships across life and 
sometimes romantic relations in adulthood. 
However, individuals may not perceive or 
interpret social cues ac curately. Social judg-
ment and decision-making abilities are lim-
ited, and caretakers must assist the person 
with life decisions. Friendships with typically 
developing peers are often affected by com-
munication or social limitations. Significant 
social and communicative support is needed 
in work settings for success. The individual can care for personal needs involving 
eating, dressing, elimination, and hygiene as an 
adult, although an  extended period of teaching and 
time is needed for the individual to become indepen-
dent in these areas, and reminders may be needed. 
Similarly, participation in all household tasks can be 
achieved by adulthood, although an extended 
period of teaching is ne eded, and ongoing supports 
will typically occur for adult-level performance. 
Independent employment in jobs that require lim-
ited conceptual and communication skills can be 
achieved, but considerable support from co-work-
ers, supervisors, and others is needed to manage 
social expectations, job co mplexities, and ancillary 
responsibilities such as scheduling, transportation, 
health benefits, and mone y management. A variety 
of recreational skills can be developed. These typi-
cally require additional  supports and learning 
opportunities over an ex tended period of time. 
Maladaptive behavior is present in a significant 
minority and causes  social problems.TABLE 1 Severity levels for intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) (continued)
Severity 
level Conceptual domain Social domain Practical domain
36 Neurodevelopmental DisordersSevere Attainment of conceptual skills 
is limited. The individual gen-
erally has little understanding 
of written language or of con-
cepts involving numbers, 
quantity, time, and money. 
Caretakers provide extensive 
supports for problem solving 
throughout life. Spoken language is quit e limited in terms of 
vocabulary and grammar. Speech may be sin-
gle words or phrases and may be supple-
mented through augmentative means. Speech 
and communication are focused on the here 
and now within everyday  events. Language is 
used for social communication more than for 
explication. Individuals understand simple 
speech and gestural communication. Relation-
ships with family members and familiar others 
are a source of pleasure and help. The individual requires suppo rt for all activities of 
daily living, including meals, dressing, bathing, and 
elimination. The individual requires supervision at 
all times. The individual cannot make responsible 
decisions regarding well-being of self or others. In 
adulthood, participation in tasks at home, recre-
ation, and work requires ongoing support and assis-
tance. Skill acquisition in all domains involves long-
term teaching and ongoing support. Maladaptive 
behavior, including self-injury, is present in a signif-
icant minority. 
Profound Conceptual skills generally 
involve the physical world 
rather than symbolic pro-
cesses. The individual may use 
objects in goal-directed fashion 
for self-care, work, and recre-
ation. Certain visuospatial 
skills, such as matching and 
sorting based on physical char-
acteristics, may be acquired. 
However, co-occ urring motor 
and sensory impairments may 
prevent functional use of 
objects. The individual has very limited understanding 
of symbolic communication in speech or ges-
ture. He or she may understand some simple 
instructions or gestures. The individual 
expresses his or her own desires and emotions 
largely through nonverbal, nonsymbolic com-
munication. The individu al enjoys relation-
ships with well-known family members, 
caretakers, and familiar others, and initiates 
and responds to social interactions through 
gestural and emotional  cues. Co-occurring 
sensory and physical impairments may pre-
vent many social activities. The individual is dependent on others for all aspects of 
daily physical care, health, and safety, although he or 
she may be able to participat e in some of these activi-
ties as well. Individuals without severe physical 
impairments may assist with some daily work tasks at 
home, like carrying dishes to the table. Simple actions 
with objects may be the basi s of participation in some 
vocational activities with high levels of ongoing sup-
port. Recreational activities  may involve, for example, 
enjoyment in listening to music, watching movies, 
going out for walks, or part icipating in water activi-
ties, all with the support of others. Co-occurring 
physical and sensory impairments are frequent 
barriers to participation (beyond watching) in home, 
recreational, and vocational activities. Maladaptive 
behavior is present in a significant minority.TABLE 1 Severity levels for intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) (continued)
Severity 
level Conceptual domain Social domain Practical domain
Intellectual Disability (Intellectual Developmental Disorder) 37
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of intellectual disab ility (intellectual developmental disorder) are
deficits in general mental abilities (Criteri on A) and impairment in everyday adaptive
functioning, in comparison to an individual ’s age-, gender-, and socioculturally matched
peers (Criterion B). Onset is during the developmental period  (Criterion C). The diagnosis
of intellectual disability is based on both clinical assessment and standardized testing of
intellectual and adaptive functions.
Criterion A refers to intellectual function s that involve reasoning, problem solving,
planning, abstract thinking, judgment, lear ning from instruction and experience, and
practical understanding. Critical componen ts include verbal comprehension, working
memory, perceptual reasoning, quantitative reasoning, abstract thought, and cognitive ef-
ficacy. Intellectual functioning is typically me asured with individually administered and
psychometrically valid, comprehensive, cultur ally appropriate, psychometrically sound
tests of intelligence. Individuals with intellec tual disability have scores of approximately
two standard deviations or more below the population mean, including a margin for mea-
surement error (generally +5 points). On te sts with a standard deviation of 15 and a mean
of 100, this involves a score of 65–75 (70 ± 5). Clinical training and judgment are required
to interpret test results and assess intellectual performance.
Factors that may affect test scores include practice effects and the “Flynn effect’ (i.e.,
overly high scores due to out- of-date test norms). Invalid scores may result from the use of
brief intelligence screening tests or group tests;  highly discrepant individual subtest scores
may make an overall IQ score invalid. Instrume nts must be normed for the individual’s so-
ciocultural background and native language. Co-occurring disorders that affect communi-
cation, language, and/or motor or sensory fu nction may affect test scores. Individual
cognitive profiles based on ne uropsychological testing are mo re useful for understanding
intellectual abilities than a single IQ score.  Such testing may identify areas of relative
strengths and weaknesses, an assessment import ant for academic and vocational planning.
IQ test scores are approximat ions of conceptual function ing but may be insufficient to
assess reasoning in real-life situations and ma stery of practical task s. For example, a per-
son with an IQ score above 70 may have such severe adaptive behavi or problems in social
judgment, social understanding, and other area s of adaptive functioning that the person’s
actual functioning is comparable to that of in dividuals with a lower IQ score. Thus, clinical
judgment is needed in interpre ting the results of IQ tests.
Deficits in adaptive functioning (Criterion B) refer to how well a person meets community
standards of personal independen ce and social responsibility, in comparison to others of sim-
ilar age and sociocultural background. Adaptive  functioning involves adaptive reasoning in
three domains: conceptual, social, and practical. The conceptual (academic) domain  involves
competence in memory, language, reading, writing, math reasoning, acquisition of practical
knowledge, problem solving, and judgment  in novel situations , among others. The social do-
main  involves awareness of others’ thoughts, feelings, and experiences; empathy; interper-
sonal communication skills; friendship abilit ies; and social judgment, among others. The
practical domain involves learning and self-management across life settings, including personal
care, job responsibilities, money management, recreation, self-management of behavior, and
school and work task organization, among others . Intellectual capacity, education, motivation,
socialization, personality features, vocational opportunity, cultural experience, and coexisting
general medical conditions or mental di sorders influence adaptive functioning.
Adaptive functioning is assessed using both clinical evaluation and individualized,
culturally appropriate, psychometrically sound measures. Standardized measures are
used with knowledgeable informants (e.g., pa rent or other f amily member; teacher; coun-
selor; care provider) and the individual to th e extent possible. Additional sources of infor-
mation include educational, developmental, medical, and mental health evaluations.
Scores from standardized measures and interv iew sources must be interpreted using clin-
ical judgment. When standardized testing is di fficult or impossible, because of a variety of
38 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
factors (e.g., sensory impairme nt, severe problem behavior), the individual may be diag-
nosed with unspecified intellectual disability.  Adaptive functioning may be difficult to
assess in a controlled setting (e.g., prisons, dete ntion centers); if poss ible, corrob orative in-
formation reflecting functioning outsid e those settings should be obtained.
Criterion B is met when at least one domain  of adaptive functioning—conceptual, so-
cial, or practical—is sufficiently impaired th at ongoing support is needed in order for the
person to perform adequately in one or more life settings at school, at work, at home, or in
the community. To meet diagnostic criteria for intellectual disability, the deficits in adap-
tive functioning must be directly related to  the intellectual impairments described in Cri-
terion A. Criterion C, onset during the deve lopmental period, refers to recognition that
intellectual and adaptive deficits are pr esent during childhood or adolescence.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Intellectual disability is a heterogeneous condition with multiple causes. There may be
associated difficulties with social judgment; assessment of risk; self-management of behav-
ior, emotions, or interpersonal relationships; or  motivation in school or work environments.
Lack of communication skills may predispose to disruptive and aggressive behaviors. Gull-
ibility is often a feature, involving naiveté in social situations and a tendency for being easily
led by others. Gullibility and lack of awareness of  risk may result in exploitation by others
and possible victimization, fraud, unintentional criminal involvement, false confessions,
and risk for physical and sexual abuse. These associated features can be important in crim-
inal cases, including Atkins-type hearings involving the death penalty.
Individuals with a diagnosis of intellectual disability with co-occurring mental disor-
ders are at risk for suicide. They think about suicide, make  suicide attempts, and may die
from them. Thus, screening for su icidal thoughts is essential in the assessment process. Be-
cause of a lack of awareness of risk and dang er, accidental injury rates may be increased.
Prevalence
Intellectual disability has an overall general population prevalence of approximately 1%,
and prevalence rates vary by age. Prevalence for severe intellectual disability is approxi-
mately 6 per 1,000.
Development and Course
Onset of intellectual disability is in the de velopmental period. The age and characteristic
features at onset depend on the etiology and severity of brain dysfunction. Delayed motor,
language, and social milestones may be identifi able within the first 2 years of life among
those with more severe intellectual disability, while mild levels may not be identifiable un-
til school age when difficulty with academic learning becomes appare nt. All criteria (in-
cluding Criterion C) must be fulfilled by hi story or current presentation. Some children
under age 5 years whose presentation will even tually meet criteria for intellectual disabil-
ity have deficits that meet criter ia for global developmental delay.
When intellectual disability is associated with  a genetic syndrome, there may be a char-
acteristic physical appearance (as in, e.g., Down syndrome). Some syndromes have a
behavioral phenotype,  which refers to specific behaviors that are characteristic of particular
genetic disorder (e.g., Lesch-Nyhan syndro me). In acquired forms, the onset may be
abrupt following an illness such as meningitis  or encephalitis or head trauma occurring
during the developmental period. When intellectual disability results from a loss of pre-
viously acquired cognitive skills, as in severe  traumatic brain injury , the diagnoses of in-
tellectual disability and of  a neurocognitive disorder may both be assigned.
Although intellectual disability is generally nonprogressive, in certain genetic disor-
ders (e.g., Rett syndrome) there are periods of worsening, followed by stabilization, and in
Intellectual Disability (Intellectual Developmental Disorder) 39
others (e.g., San Phillippo synd rome) progressive worsening of  intellectual function. After
early childhood, the disorder is generally lifelong, although severity levels may change
over time. The course may be influenced by underlying medical or genetic conditions and
co-occurring conditions (e.g., hearing or visual impairments, epilepsy). Early and ongoing in-
terventions may improve adap tive functioning throughout  childhood and adulthood. In
some cases, these result in significant improve ment of intellectual functioning, such that
the diagnosis of intellectual disability is no lo nger appropriate. Thus, it is common practice
when assessing infants and young children to de lay diagnosis of intellectual disability un-
til after an appropriate course of intervention  is provided. For olde r children and adults,
the extent of support provided may allow for fu ll participation in all activities of daily liv-
ing and improved adaptive function. Diagnost ic assessments must determine whether im-
proved adaptive skills are the result of a st able, generalized new skill acquisition (in which
case the diagnosis of intellectual disability may no longer be appropriate) or whether the
improvement is contingent on the presence of supports and ongoing interventions (in
which case the diagnosis of intellectua l disability may still be appropriate).
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Genetic and physiological. Prenatal etiologies include genetic syndromes (e.g., se-
quence variations or copy number variants involving one or more genes; chromosomal
disorders), inborn errors of metabolism, brai n malformations, maternal disease (including
placental disease), and environmental influences (e.g., alcohol, other drugs, toxins, terato-
gens). Perinatal causes include a variety of labor and delivery-related events leading to
neonatal encephalopathy. Postnatal causes include hypoxic ischemic injury, traumatic
brain injury, infections, demyelinating disorder s, seizure disorders (e .g., infantile spasms),
severe and chronic social deprivation, and toxic metabolic syndromes and intoxications
(e.g., lead, mercury).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
Intellectual disability occurs in all races and cultures. Cultural sen sitivity and knowledge
are needed during assessment, and the individu al’s ethnic, cultural, and linguistic back-
ground, available experiences, and adaptive functioning within his or her community and
cultural setting must be taken into account.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Overall, males are more likely than female s to be diagnosed with both mild (average
male:female ratio 1.6:1) and severe (average male:female ratio 1.2:1) forms of intellectual
disability. However, gender ratios vary widely  in reported studies.  Sex-linked genetic fac-
tors and male vulnerability to brain insult ma y account for some of the gender differences.
Diagnostic Markers
A comprehensive evaluation includes an assess ment of intellectual capacity and adaptive
functioning; identification of  genetic and nongenetic etiolo gies; evaluation for associated
medical conditions (e.g., cerebral palsy, seiz ure disorder); and eval uation for co-occurring
mental, emotional, and behavior al disorders. Components of the evaluation may include
basic pre- and perinatal medical history, three- generational family pedigree, physical exam-
ination, genetic evaluation (e.g., karyotype or  chromosomal microarray  analysis and testing
for specific genetic syndromes), and metabo lic screening and neuroimaging assessment.
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of intellectual disability should be  made whenever Criteria A, B, and C are
met. A diagnosis of intellectual disability should not be assumed because of a particular
40 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
genetic or medical condition. A genetic syndro me linked to intellec tual disability should
be noted as a concurrent diagnosi s with the intellectual disability.
Major and mild neurocognitive disorders. Intellectual disability is categorized as a neu-
rodevelopmental disorder and is distinct from the neurocognitive disorders, which are
characterized by a loss of cognitive function ing. Major neurocognitive disorder may co-
occur with intellectual disability (e.g., an individual with Down syndrome who develops
Alzheimer’s disease, or an individual with  intellectual disability who loses further cogni-
tive capacity following a head injury). In such cases, the diagnoses of intellectual disability
and neurocognitive disorder may both be given.
Communication disorders and specific learning disorder. These neurodevelopmental
disorders are specific to the communication and learning domains and do not show defi-
cits in intellectual an d adaptive behavior. They may co-o ccur with intellectual disability.
Both diagnoses are made if full criteria are met for intellectual disability and a communi-
cation disorder or specific learning disorder.
Autism spectrum disorder. Intellectual disability is common among individuals with
autism spectrum disorder. Assessment of intellectual ability may be complicated by so-
cial-communication and behavior deficits inherent to auti sm spectrum disorder, which
may interfere with understanding and comply ing with test procedures. Appropriate as-
sessment of intellectual functioning in autism spectrum disorder is essential, with reas-
sessment across the developmental period, becaus e IQ scores in auti sm spectrum disorder
may be unstable, particularly in early childhood.
Comorbidity
Co-occurring mental, neurodevelopmental, me dical, and physical conditions are frequent
in intellectual disability, with rates of some conditions (e.g., ment al disorders, cerebral
palsy, and epilepsy) three to fo ur times higher than in the ge neral population. The prognosis
and outcome of co-occurring diagnoses may be influenced by the presence of intellectual
disability. Assessment procedur es may require modifications because of associated disor-
ders, including communication disorders, autism spectrum disorder, and motor, sensory,
or other disorders. Knowledgeable informan ts are essential for identifying symptoms
such as irritability, mood dysregulation, aggression, eating problems, and sleep problems,
and for assessing adaptive functioning in various community settings.
The most common co-occurring mental an d neurodevelopmental disorders are atten-
tion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder; depressi ve and bipolar disorders; anxiety disorders;
autism spectrum disorder; stereotypic movement d isorder (with or without self-injurious
behavior); impulse-control disorders; and ma jor neurocognitive disorder. Major depres-
sive disorder may occur througho ut the range of severity of intellectual disability. Self-
injurious behavior requires pr ompt diagnostic attention and may warrant a separate di-
agnosis of stereotypic movement  disorder. Individuals with intellectual disability, partic-
ularly those with more severe intellectual disability, may also exhibit aggression and
disruptive behaviors, including harm of others or property destruction.
Relationship to Ot her Classifications
ICD-11 (in development at the time of  this publication) uses the term intellectual develop-
mental disorders  to indicate that these are disorders that involve impaired brain functioning
early in life. These disorders are described in  ICD-11 as a metasyndrome occurring in the
developmental period analogous to dementia or neurocognitive disorder in later life.
There are four subtypes in ICD-11: mild, moderate, severe, and profound.
The American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (AAIDD)
also uses the term intellectual disability  with a similar meaning to the term as used in this
Global Developmental Delay 41
manual. The AAIDD’s classification is multidimensional rather than categorical and is
based on the disability construc t. Rather than listing specifie rs as is done in DSM-5, the
AAIDD emphasizes a profile of supports based on severity.
Global Developmental Delay
315.8 (F88)
This diagnosis is reserved for individuals under  the age of 5 years when the clinical severity
level cannot be reliably assessed during early childhood. This category is diagnosed when
an individual fails to meet expected developmental  milestones in several areas of intellec-
tual functioning, and applies to individuals  who are unable to undergo systematic assess-
ments of intellectual functioning, including children who are too young to participate in
standardized testing. This category requires reassessment after a period of time.
Unspecified Intellectual Disability
(Intellectual Developmental Disorder)
319 (F79)
This category is rese rved for individuals over the age of 5 years when assessment of the
degree of intellectual disabi lity (intellectual developmental disorder) by means of locally
available procedures is rendered difficult or impossible because of associated sensory or
physical impairments, as in blindness or prel ingual deafness; locomotor disability; or pres-
ence of severe problem behaviors or co-occurring mental disorder. This category should
only be used in exceptional circumstances and requires reassessment after a period of time. 
Communication Disorders
Disorders of communication include deficits  in language, speech, and communication.
Speech  is the expressive production of sounds and includes an indivi dual’s articulation,
fluency, voice, and resonance quality. Language  includes the form, fu nction, and use of a
conventional system of symbol s (i.e., spoken words, sign language, written words, pic-
tures) in a rule -governed manner for communication. Communication  includes any verbal
or nonverbal behavior (whether intentional or unintentional) that influences the behavior,
ideas, or attitudes of another individual. Assessments of speech, language and communi-
cation abilities must take into account the individual's cultural and language context,
particularly for individuals growing up in bilingual environments. The standardized mea-
sures of language development and of nonverba l intellectual capacity must be relevant for
the cultural and linguistic group (i.e., tests developed and standardized for one group may
not provide appropriate norms for a different group). The diagnostic category of commu-
nication disorders includes the following: language disorder, speech sound disorder,
childhood-onset fluency disord er (stuttering), social (pra gmatic) communication disor-
der, and other specified and unspecified communica tion disorders.
42 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Language Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 315.32 (F80.2)
A. Persistent difficulties in the acquisition and use of language across modalities (i.e.,
spoken, written, sign language, or other) due to deficits in comprehension or produc-
tion that include the following:
1. Reduced vocabulary (word knowledge and use).
2. Limited sentence structure (ability to put words and word endings together to form
sentences based on the rules of grammar and morphology).
3. Impairments in discourse (ability to use vocabulary and connect sentences to ex-
plain or describe a topic or series of events or have a conversation).
B. Language abilities are substantially and quantifiably below those expected for age, re-
sulting in functional limitations in effective communication, social participation, aca-
demic achievement, or occupational performance, individually or in any combination.
C. Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
D. The difficulties are not attributable to hearing or other sensory impairment, motor dys-
function, or another medical or neurological condition and are not better explained by in-
tellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) or global developmental delay.
Diagnostic Features
The core diagnostic features of language disorder are difficulties in the acquisition and use
of language due to deficits in the comprehe nsion or production of vocabulary, sentence
structure, and discourse. The language defi cits are evident in spoken communication,
written communication, or sign language. La nguage learning and use is dependent on
both receptive and expressive skills. Expressive ability refers to the production of vocal, ges-
tural, or verbal signals, while receptive ability  refers to the process of receiving and com-
prehending language messages. Language skills  need to be assessed in both expressive
and receptive modalities as these may differ in severity. For example, an individual’s ex-
pressive language may be seve rely impaired, while his recept ive language is hardly im-
paired at all.
Language disorder usually affects vocabulary and grammar, and these effects then
limit the capacity for discourse. The child’s fi rst words and phrases are likely to be delayed
in onset; vocabulary size is smaller and less varied than expected; and sentences are
shorter and less complex with grammatical errors , especially in past tense. Deficits in com-
prehension of language are fr equently underestimated, as children may be good at using
context to infer meaning. There may be word-finding problems, impoverished verbal def-
initions, or poor understand ing of synonyms, multiple meanings, or word play appro-
priate for age and culture. Problems with  remembering new words and sentences are
manifested by difficulties following instructions of increasing length, difficulties rehears-
ing strings of verbal information (e.g., remembering a phone number or a shopping list),
and difficulties remembering novel sound se quences, a skill that may be important for
learning new words. Difficulties with discour se are shown by a reduced ability to provide
adequate information abou t the key events and to narrate a coherent story.
The language difficulty is manifest by abilities substantially and quantifiably below
that expected for age and significantly inte rfering with academic achievement, occupa-
tional performance, effective communication, or  socialization (Criterion B). A diagnosis of
language disorder is made based on the synthesis of the individual’s history, direct clinical
observation in different contexts (i.e., home, school, or work), and scores from standard-
ized tests of language ability that can be  used to guide estimates of severity.
Language Disorder 43
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A positive family history of language disorders is often present. Individuals, even chil-
dren, can be adept at accommodating to their limited language. They may appear to be shy
or reticent to talk. Affected individuals may prefer to communicate only with family mem-
bers or other familiar individuals. Although these social indicators are not diagnostic of a
language disorder, if they are notable and pers istent, they warrant referral for a full lan-
guage assessment. Language d isorder, particularly expressiv e deficits, may co-occur with
speech sound disorder.
Development and Course
Language acquisition is marked by changes from  onset in toddlerhood to the adult level of
competency that appears during adolescence.  Changes appear across the dimensions of
language (sounds, words, grammar, narrati ves/expository texts, and conversational
skills) in age-graded increments and synchron ies. Language disorder emerges during the
early developmental period; however, there is considerable variation in early vocabulary
acquisition and early word combinations, an d individual differenc es are not, as single
indicators, highly predictive of later outcomes. By age 4 years, individual differences in
language ability are more stable, with bette r measurement accuracy, and are highly pre-
dictive of later outcomes. Language disorder diagnosed from 4 years of age is likely to be
stable over time and typically persists into adulthood, although the particular profile of
language strengths and deficits is likely to change over the course of development.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Children with receptive language impairment s have a poorer prognosis than those with
predominantly expressive impairments. They are more resistant to treatment, and diffi-
culties with reading comprehe nsion are frequently seen.
Genetic and physiological. Language disorders are highly heritable, and family mem-
bers are more likely to have a history of language impairment.
Differential Diagnosis
Normal variations in language. Language disorder needs to be distinguished from nor-
mal developmental variations, and this distinctio n may be difficult to make before 4 years
of age. Regional, social, or cultural/ethnic va riations of language (e.g., dialects) must be
considered when an individual is being assessed for language impairment.
Hearing or other sensory impairment. Hearing impairment needs to be excluded as the
primary cause of language difficulties. Langua ge deficits may be associated with a hearing
impairment, other sensory deficit, or a speech-motor deficit. When language deficits are in
excess of those usually associ ated with these problems, a di agnosis of language disorder
may be made.
Intellectual disability (intell ectual developmental disorder). Language delay is often the
presenting feature of intellect ual disability, and the definitive diagnosis may not be made
until the child is able to complete standard ized assessments. A separate diagnosis is not
given unless the language deficits are clearl y in excess of the intellectual limitations.
Neurological disorders. Language disorder can be acquired in association with neuro-
logical disorders, including epilepsy (e.g., ac quired aphasia or Landau-Kleffner syndrome).
Language regression. Loss of speech and language in a child younger than 3 years may
be a sign of autism spectrum disorder (with developmental regression) or a specific neuro-
logical condition, such as Landau-Kleffner syndrome. Among children older than 3 years,
language loss may be a symptom of seizures, and a diagnostic assessment is necessary to
exclude the presence of epilepsy (e.g., routine and sleep electroencephalogram).
44 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Comorbidity
Language disorder is strongly associated with other neurodevelopmental disorders in
terms of specific learning d isorder (literacy and numeracy),  attention-deficit/hyperactiv-
ity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, and developmental coordination disorder. It is
also associated with social (pragmatic) commu nication disorder. A positive family history
of speech or language disorders is often present.
Speech Sound Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 315.39 (F80.0)
A. Persistent difficulty with speech sound production that interferes with speech intelligi-
bility or prevents verbal communication of messages. 
B. The disturbance causes limitations in effect ive communication that interfere with social
participation, academic achievement, or occupational performance, individually or in
any combination.
C. Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
D. The difficulties are not attributable to congenital or acquired conditions, such as cere-
bral palsy, cleft palate, deafness or hearing loss, traumatic brain injury, or other medi-
cal or neurological conditions. 
Diagnostic Features 
Speech sound production descri bes the clear articulation of  the phonemes (i.e., individual
sounds) that in combination make up spoken words. Speech sound production requires both
the phonological knowledge of speech sounds and the ability to coordinate the movements of
the articulators (i.e., the jaw, tongue, and lips ,) with breathing and vocalizing for speech. Chil-
dren with speech production difficulties may experience difficulty with phonological knowl-
edge of speech sounds or the ability to coordi nate movements for speech in varying degrees.
Speech sound disorder is thus heterogeneous in its underlying mechanisms and includes pho-
nological disorder and articulation disorder . A speech sound disorder is diagnosed when
speech sound production is not what would be expected based on the child’s age and devel-
opmental stage and when the deficits are not the result of a physical, st ructural, neurological,
or hearing impairment. Among typically develo ping children at age 4 years, overall speech
should be intelligible, whereas at age 2 years, only 50% may be understandable.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Language disorder, particularly expressive de ficits, may be found to co-occur with speech
sound disorder. A positive family history of speech or language  disorders is often present. 
If the ability to rapidly coordinate the articu lators is a particular aspect of difficulty,
there may be a history of delay or incoordinati on in acquiring skills that also utilize the
articulators and related facial musculature; among others, these sk ills include chewing,
maintaining mouth closure, and blowing the no se. Other areas of motor coordination may
be impaired as in developm ental coordination disorder. Verbal dyspraxia  is a term also
used for speech prod uction problems.
Speech may be differentially impaired in ce rtain genetic conditions (e.g., Down syn-
drome, 22q deletion, FoxP2  gene mutation). If present, these should also be coded.
Development and Course
Learning to produce speech sounds clearly and accurately and learning to produce con-
nected speech fluently are developmental skills. Articulation of speech sounds follows a
Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering) 45
developmental pattern, which is reflected in the age norms of standardized tests. It is not
unusual for typically developing children to  use developmental processes for shortening
words and syllables as they are learning to talk, but their progression in mastering speech
sound production should result in mostly in telligible speech by age 3 years. Children with
speech sound disorder continue to use immature phonological simplification processes
past the age when most children can produce words clearly.
Most speech sounds should be produced cl early and most words should be pronounced
accurately according to age an d community norms by age 7 years. The most frequently mis-
articulated sounds also tend to be learned later, leading them to be called the “late eight” ( l, r,
s, z, th, ch, dzh, and zh). Misarticulation of an y of these sounds by it self could be considered
within normal limits up to age 8 years. When multiple sounds are involved, it may be appro-
priate to target some of those sounds as part of  a plan to improve intelligibility prior to the age
at which almost all children can produce them a ccurately. Lisping (i.e., misarticulating sibi-
lants) is particularly common and may involve fr ontal or lateral patterns of airstream direc-
tion. It may be associated with an ab normal tongue-thrust swallowing pattern.
Most children with speech sound disorder re spond well to treatment, and speech dif-
ficulties improve over time, and thus the diso rder may not be lifelong. However, when a
language disorder is also present, the spee ch disorder has a poorer prognosis and may be
associated with specific learning disorders.
Differential Diagnosis
Normal variations in speech. Regional, social, or cultural/ethnic variations of speech
should be considered before making the diagnosis.
Hearing or other sensory impairment. Hearing impairment or deafness may result in
abnormalities of speech. Defici ts of speech sound production may be associated with a
hearing impairment, other sensory deficit, or a speech-mo tor deficit. When speech deficits
are in excess of those usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of speech sound
disorder may be made.
Structural deficits. Speech impairment may be due to stru ctural deficits (e.g., cleft palate).
Dysarthria. Speech impairment may be attributable to a motor disorder, such as cerebral
palsy. Neurological signs, as well as distinct ive features of voice, differentiate dysarthria
from speech sound disorder, although in young children (under 3 years) differentiation
may be difficult, particularly  when there is no or minima l general body motor involve-
ment (as in, e.g., Worster-Drought syndrome).
Selective mutism. Limited use of speech may be a sign  of selective mutism, an anxiety
disorder that is characterized by a lack of sp eech in one or more contexts or settings. Se-
lective mutism may develop in children with a speech disorder because of embarassment
about their impairments, but many children with selective mutism exhibit normal speech
in “safe” settings, such as at home or with close friends. 
Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering)
Diagnostic Criteria 315.35 (F80.81)
A. Disturbances in the normal fluency and time patterning of speech that are inappropri-
ate for the individual’s age and language skills, persist over time, and are characterized
by frequent and marked occurrences of one (or more) of the following: 
1. Sound and syllable repetitions.
2. Sound prolongations of consonants as well as vowels.
46 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
3. Broken words (e.g., pauses within a word).
4. Audible or silent blocking (filled or unfilled pauses in speech).
5. Circumlocutions (word substitutions to avoid problematic words).
6. Words produced with an excess of physical tension.
7. Monosyllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-I-I see him”).
B. The disturbance causes anxiety about speaking or limitations in effective communica-
tion, social participation, or academic or occupational performance, individually or in
any combination.
C. The onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period. ( Note:  Later-onset cases
are diagnosed as 307.0 [F98.5] adult-onset fluency disorder.)
D. The disturbance is not attributable to a s peech-motor or sensory deficit, dysfluency as-
sociated with neurological insult (e.g., stroke, tumor, trauma), or another medical con-
dition and is not better explained by another mental disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of childho od-onset fluency disorder (stu ttering) is a disturbance in
the normal fluency and time patterning of spee ch that is inappropriate for the individual’s
age. This disturbance is characterized by freq uent repetitions or prolongations of sounds
or syllables and by other types of speech dysfluencies, including broken words (e.g.,
pauses within a word), audible or silent blocki ng (i.e., filled or unfilled pauses in speech),
circumlocutions (i.e., word su bstitutions to avoid proble matic words), words produced
with an excess of physical tension, and mono syllabic whole-word repetitions (e.g., “I-I-I-I
see him”). The disturbance in fluency interferes with academic or occupational achieve-
ment or with social communication. The extent  of the disturbance varies from situation to
situation and often is more severe when there is special pressure to communicate (e.g., giv-
ing a report at school, interviewing for a job) . Dysfluency is often absent during oral read-
ing, singing, or talking to inanimate objects or to pets.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Fearful anticipation of the problem may develop. The speaker may attempt to avoid dys-
fluencies by linguistic mechanisms (e.g., al tering the rate of sp eech, avoiding certain
words or sounds) or by avoiding certain speec h situations, such as telephoning or public
speaking. In addition to being features of the condition, stress and anxiety have been
shown to exacerbate dysfluency.
Childhood-onset fluency diso rder may also be accompanied by motor movements
(e.g., eye blinks, tics, tremors of the lips or face, jerking of the head, breathing movements,
fist clenching). Children with fluency disorder  show a range of language abilities, and the
relationship between fluency disorder  and language abilities is unclear.
Development and Course
Childhood-onset fluency disord er, or developmental stutteri ng, occurs by age 6 for 80%–
90% of affected individuals, with age at onset ranging from 2 to 7 years. The onset can be
insidious or more sudden. Typically, dysfluencies  start gradually, with repetition of initial
consonants, first words of a phrase, or long words. The child may not be aware of dysflu-
encies. As the disorder progresses, the dysfluencies become more frequent and interfering,
occurring on the most meaningful words or phr ases in the utterance. As the child becomes
aware of the speech difficulty, he or she may develop mechanisms for avoiding the dys-
fluencies and emotional responses, including avoidance of public speaking and use of
short and simple utterances. Longitudinal research shows that 65%–85% of children re-
Social (Pragmatic) Communication Disorder 47
cover from the dysfluency, with severity of fl uency disorder at age 8 years predicting re-
covery or persistence into adolescence and beyond.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. The risk of stuttering among first-degree biological rela-
tives of individuals wi th childhood-onset fluency disorder  is more than three times the
risk in the general population.
Functional Consequences of 
Childhood-Onset Fluency Disorder (Stuttering)
In addition to being features of the condit ion, stress and anxiety can exacerbate dysflu-
ency. Impairment of social function ing may result from this anxiety.
Differential Diagnosis
Sensory deficits. Dysfluencies of speech may be associated with a hearing impairment
or other sensory deficit or a sp eech-motor deficit. When the speech dysfluencies are in ex-
cess of those usually associated with these problems, a diagnosis of childhood-onset flu-
ency disorder may be made.
Normal speech dysfluencies. The disorder must be distinguished from normal dysflu-
encies that occur frequently in young children, which include whole-word or phrase rep-
etitions (e.g., “I want, I want ice cream”), incomplete phrases, in terjections, unfilled
pauses, and parenthetical remarks. If these difficulties increase in frequency or complexity
as the child grows older, a diagnosis of child hood-onset fluency diso rder is appropriate.
Medication side effects. Stuttering may occur as a side effect of medication and may be
detected by a temporal relationship with exposure to the medication.
Adult-onset dysfluencies. If onset of dysfluencies is during  or after adolescence, it is an
“adult-onset dysfluency” rather than a neurodevelopmental disorder . Adult-onset dysflu-
encies are associated with specific neurologic al insults and a variety of medical conditions
and mental disorders and may be specified with them, but they are not a DSM-5 diagnosis. 
Tourette’s disorder. Vocal tics and repetitive vocalizations of  Tourette’s disorder
should be distinguishable from  the repetitive sounds of childhood-onset fluency disorder
by their nature and timing. 
Social (Pragmatic) Communication Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 315.39 (F80.89)
A. Persistent difficulties in the social use of verbal and nonverbal communication as man-
ifested by all of the following:
1. Deficits in using communication for social purposes, such as greeting and sharing
information, in a manner that is appropriate for the social context.
2. Impairment of the ability to change communication to match context or the needs of
the listener, such as speaking differently in a classroom than on a playground, talk-
ing differently to a child than to an adul t, and avoiding use of overly formal language.
3. Difficulties following rules for conversation and storytelling, such as taking turns in
conversation, rephrasing when misunderstoo d, and knowing how to use verbal and
nonverbal signals to regulate interaction.
48 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
4. Difficulties understanding what is not explicitly stated (e.g., making inferences) and
nonliteral or ambiguous meanings of language (e.g., idioms, humor, metaphors,
multiple meanings that depend on the context for interpretation).
B. The deficits result in functional limitations in effective communication, social participa-
tion, social relationships, academic achievement, or occupational performance, indi-
vidually or in combination.
C. The onset of the symptoms is in the ear ly developmental period (but deficits may not
become fully manifest until social communication demands exceed limited capacities).
D. The symptoms are not attributable to another medical or neurological condition or to low
abilities in the domains of word structure and grammar, and are not better explained by
autism spectrum disorder, intellectual dis ability (intellectual developmental disorder),
global developmental delay, or another mental disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Social (pragmatic) communication  disorder is characterized by a primary difficulty with
pragmatics, or the social use of language an d communication, as manifested by deficits in
understanding and following social rules of verbal and nonverbal communication in nat-
uralistic contexts, changing language accordin g to the needs of the listener or situation,
and following rules for conversations and stor ytelling. The deficits in social communica-
tion result in functional limitations in effective communicatio n, social participation, devel-
opment of social relationships, academic ac hievement, or occupational performance. The
deficits are not better explaine d by low abilities in the domains of structural language or
cognitive ability.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The most common associated feat ure of social (pragmatic) co mmunication disorder is lan-
guage impairment, which is characterized by a history of delay in reaching language mile-
stones, and historical, if not current, structur al language problems (see “Language Disorder”
earlier in this chapter). Individuals with social  communication deficits may avoid social inter-
actions. Attention-deficit/hype ractivity disorder (ADHD), beha vioral problems, and specific
learning disorders are also more common among affected individuals.
Development and Course 
Because social (pragmatic) co mmunication depends on adeq uate developmental progress
in speech and language, diagnosis of social (pragmatic) communication disorder is rare
among children younger than 4 years. By ag e 4 or 5 years, most  children should possess
adequate speech and language abilities to permit identification of specific deficits in social
communication. Milder forms of  the disorder may not become apparent until early ado-
lescence, when language and social interactions become more complex.
The outcome of social (pragmatic) communicat ion disorder is variable, with some chil-
dren improving substantially over time and othe rs continuing to have difficulties persist-
ing into adulthood. Even am ong those who have significant improvements, the early
deficits in pragmatics may cause lasting impa irments in social relationships and behavior
and also in acquisition of other rela ted skills, such as written expression. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. A family history of autism spectrum disorder, communica-
tion disorders, or specific learning disorder appears to increase the risk for social (prag-
matic) communication disorder.
Unspecified Communication Disorder 49
Differential Diagnosis
Autism spectrum disorder. Autism spectrum disorder is  the primary diagnostic con-
sideration for individuals presenting with social communication de ficits. The two disor-
ders can be differentiated by the presence in  autism spectrum disorder of restricted/
repetitive patterns of behavior , interests, or activities and their absence in social (prag-
matic) communication disorder. Individuals wi th autism spectrum disorder may only dis-
play the restricted/repetitive patterns of behavi or, interests, and activities during the early
developmental period, so a co mprehensive history should be  obtained. Current absence of
symptoms would not preclude a diagnosis of autism spectrum  disorder, if the restricted
interests and repetitive behaviors were present in the past. A diagnosis of social (prag-
matic) communication disorder should be considered only if the developmental history
fails to reveal any evidence of restricted/repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or ac-
tivities.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Primary deficits of AD HD may cause impair-
ments in social communication and functional limitations of effectiv e communication, so-
cial participation, or academic achievement.
Social anxiety disorder (social phobia). The symptoms of social communication disor-
der overlap with those of social anxiety diso rder. The differentiating feature is the timing
of the onset of symptoms. In social (pragm atic) communication di sorder, the individual
has never had effective social communication; in social anxiety disorder, the social com-
munication skills developed appr opriately but are not utilized because of anxiety, fear, or
distress about social interactions.
Intellectual disability (intellectual developm ental disorder) and global developmental
delay. Social communication skills may be deficient among individuals with global de-
velopmental delay or in tellectual disability, but a separa te diagnosis is not given unless
the social communication deficits are clearl y in excess of the intellectual limitations.
Unspecified Communication Disorder
307.9 (F80.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of communication
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of func tioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for com-
munication disorder or for any of the disorders in the neurodevelopmental disorders diag-
nostic class. The unspecified communication disorder category is used in situations in
which the clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for com-
munication disorder or for a specific neurodevelopmental disorder, and includes presen-
tations in which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis.
50 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Autism Spectrum Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 299.00 (F84.0)
A. Persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across multiple con-
texts, as manifested by the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative,
not exhaustive; see text):
1. Deficits in social-emotional reciprocit y, ranging, for example, from abnormal social
approach and failure of normal back-and-fort h conversation; to reduced sharing of
interests, emotions, or affect; to failure to initiate or respond to social interactions.
2. Deficits in nonverbal communicative behavi ors used for social interaction, ranging,
for example, from poorly integrated ver bal and nonverbal communication; to abnor-
malities in eye contact and body language or deficits in understanding and use of
gestures; to a total lack of facial expressions and nonverbal communication.
3. Deficits in developing, maintaining, and understanding relationships, ranging, for ex-
ample, from difficulties adjusting behavior to suit various social contexts; to difficulties
in sharing imaginative play or in making friends; to absence of interest in peers.
Specify current severity:
Severity is based on social communicat ion impairments and restricted, re-
petitive patterns of behavior  (seeTable 2).
B. Restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities, as manifested by at
least two of the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative, not exhaus-
tive; see text):
1. Stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects, or speech (e.g., simple
motor stereotypies, lining up toys or flipping objects, echolalia, idiosyncratic
phrases).
2. Insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines, or ritualized patterns of
verbal or nonverbal behavior (e.g., extreme distress at small changes, difficulties
with transitions, rigid thinking patterns, greeting rituals, need to take same route or
eat same food every day).
3. Highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus (e.g.,
strong attachment to or preoccupation with unusual objects, excessively circum-
scribed or perseverative interests).
4. Hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input or unusual interest in sensory aspects of
the environment (e.g., apparent indifference to pain/temperature, adverse re-
sponse to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects,
visual fascination with lights or movement).
Specify current severity:
Severity is based on social communicat ion impairments and restricted, re-
petitive patterns of behavior  (see Table 2).
C. Symptoms must be present in the early developmental period (but may not become
fully manifest until social demands exceed limited capacities, or may be masked by
learned strategies in later life). 
D. Symptoms cause clinically significant impai rment in social, occupat ional, or other im-
portant areas of current functioning.
Autism Spectrum Disorder 51
E. These disturbances are not better explained by  intellectual disability (intellectual devel-
opmental disorder) or global developmental delay. Intellectual disability and autism
spectrum disorder frequently co-occur; to make comorbid diagnoses of autism spec-
trum disorder and intellectual disability, social communication should be below that ex-
pected for general developmental level.
Note:  Individuals with a well-established DSM-IV diagnosis of autistic disorder, Asperger’s
disorder, or pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified should be given the
diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder. Individuals who have marked deficits in social
communication, but whose symptoms do not ot herwise meet criteria for autism spectrum
disorder, should be evaluated for social (pragmatic) communication disorder.
Specify if:
With or without accompanying intellectual impairment
With or without accompan ying language impairment
Associated with a known medical or gene tic condition or en vironmental factor
(Coding note:  Use additional code to identify the associated medical or genetic condition.)
Associated with another neurodevelopmen tal, mental, or behavioral disorder
(Coding note:  Use additional code[s] to identify the associated neurodevelopmental,
mental, or behavioral disorder[s].)
With catatonia  (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental dis-
order, pp. 119–120, for definition) ( Coding note:  Use additional code 293.89 [F06.1]
catatonia associated with autism spectrum disorder to indicate the presence of the co-
morbid catatonia.)
Recording Procedures
For autism spectrum disorder th at is associated with a known medical or genetic condition
or environmental factor, or with another ne urodevelopmental, mental , or behavioral dis-
order, record autism spectrum disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or
factor) (e.g., autism spectrum disorder associated with Rett syndrome). Severity should be
recorded as level of support needed for ea ch of the two psychopa thological domains in
Table 2 (e.g., “requiring very substantial support for deficits  in social communication and
requiring substantial support fo r restricted, repetitive behaviors”). Specification of “with
accompanying intellectual impairment” or “without accompanying intellectual impair-
ment” should be recorded next. Language im pairment specification should be recorded
thereafter. If there is accompan ying language impairment, the current level of verbal func-
tioning should be recorded (e.g., “with accompanying language impairment—no intelligi-
ble speech” or “with accompanying language impairment—phrase speech”). If catatonia is
present, record separately “catatonia asso ciated with autism spectrum disorder.”
Specifiers
The severity specifiers (see Table 2) may be used to describe succinctly the current symp-
tomatology (which might fall below level 1), with  the recognition that severity may vary by
context and fluctuate over time. Severity of social communication difficulties and re-
stricted, repetitive behaviors sh ould be separately rated. The descriptive severity categories
should not be used to determine eligibility fo r and provision of services; these can only be
developed at an individual level and through di scussion of personal priorities and targets.
Regarding the specifier “with or without ac companying intellectual impairment,” un-
derstanding the (often uneven) intellectual prof ile of a child or adult with autism spectrum
disorder is necessary for interpre ting diagnostic features. Separate estimates of verbal and
nonverbal skill are necessary (e.g., using untimed nonverbal tests to assess potential
strengths in individuals with limited language).
52 Neurodevelopmental DisordersTABLE 2 Severity levels for autism spectrum disorder
Severity level Social communication Restricted, repetitive behaviors
Level 3 
“Requiring very substantial support”Severe deficits in verbal and nonverbal social com-
munication skills cause severe impairments in func-
tioning, very limited initiation of social 
interactions, and minimal response to social over-
tures from others. For example, a person with few 
words of intelligible speech who rarely initiates 
interaction and, when he or she does, makes 
unusual approaches to meet needs only and 
responds to only very direct social approaches.Inflexibility of behavior, extreme difficulty coping 
with change, or other restricted/repetitive behav-
iors markedly interfere with functioning in all 
spheres. Great distress/difficulty changing focus 
or action.
Level 2
“Requiring substantial support”Marked deficits in verbal and nonverbal social com-
munication skills; social  impairments apparent 
even with supports in place; limited initiation of 
social interactions; an d reduced or abnormal 
responses to social overtures from others. For 
example, a person who sp eaks simple sentences, 
whose interaction is limited to narrow special inter-
ests, and who has markedly odd nonverbal com-
munication.Inflexibility of behavior , difficulty coping with 
change, or other restricted/repetitive behaviors 
appear frequently enough to be obvious to the 
casual observer and inte rfere with functioning 
in a variety of contexts. Distress and/or difficulty 
changing focus or action.
Level 1 
“Requiring support”Without supports in place, deficits in social communi-
cation cause noticeable impairments.
Difficulty initiating social interactions, and clear 
examples of atypical or unsuccessful responses to 
social overtures of others. May appear to have 
decreased interest in social interactions. For example, 
a person who is able to speak in full sentences and 
engages in communication but whose to-and-fro con-
versation with others fails, and whose attempts to 
make friends are odd and typically unsuccessful.Inflexibility of behavior causes significant interfer-
ence with functioning in one or more contexts. Dif-
ficulty switching between activities. Problems of 
organization and planning hamper independence.
Autism Spectrum Disorder 53
To use the specifier “with or without acco mpanying language impairment,” the cur-
rent level of verbal functioning should be ass essed and described. Ex amples of the specific
descriptions for “with accompanying language impairment” might include no intelligible
speech (nonverbal), single words only, or phrase speech. Language level in individuals
“without accompanying language impairment” might be further described by speaks in
full sentences or has fluent speech. Since receptive language may lag behind expressive
language development in autism spectrum disorder, receptive and expressive language
skills should be considered separately.
The specifier “associated with a known medica l or genetic condition or environmental fac-
tor” should be used when the individual has a known genetic disorder (e.g., Rett syndrome,
Fragile X syndrome, Down syndrome), a medical disorder (e.g. epilepsy), or a history of envi-
ronmental exposure (e.g., valproate, fetal alcohol syndrome, very low birth weight).
Additional neurodevelopmental, mental or be havioral conditions should also be noted
(e.g., attention-deficit/hypera ctivity disorder; developmenta l coordination disorder; dis-
ruptive behavior, impulse-control, or conduct disorders; anxiety, depressive, or bipolar
disorders; tics or Tourette’s disorder; self-inj ury; feeding, eliminatio n, or sleep disorders).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of autism spectrum diso rder are persistent impairment in reciprocal
social communication and social interaction (Criterion A), and restricted, repetitive pat-
terns of behavior, interests, or activities (Criterion B). These symptoms are present from
early childhood and limit or impair everyday  functioning (Criteria C and D). The stage at
which functional impairment becomes obvious will vary according to characteristics of
the individual and his or her environment. Co re diagnostic features are evident in the
developmental period, but intervention, co mpensation, and current supports may mask
difficulties in at least some contexts. Manifestations of the disorder also vary greatly de-
pending on the severity of the autistic condit ion, developmental level,  and chronological age;
hence, the term spectrum. Autism spectrum disorder enco mpasses disorders previously re-
ferred to as early infantile  autism, childhood autism, Ka nner’s autism, high-functioning
autism, atypical autism, pervasive developmen tal disorder not otherw ise specified, child-
hood disintegrative disorder , and Asperger’s disorder.
The impairments in communicat ion and social interaction specified in Criterion A are
pervasive and sustained. Diagnoses are most  valid and reliable when based on multiple
sources of information, including clinician’s observations, caregiver history, and, when
possible, self-report. Verbal and nonverbal deficits in social communication have varying
manifestations, depending on the individual’s age, intellectual level,  and language ability,
as well as other factors such as treatment history and current support. Many individuals
have language deficits, ranging from complete lack of speech through language delays,
poor comprehension of speech, echoed speech, or stilted  and overly literal language. Even
when formal language skills (e.g ., vocabulary, grammar) are intact, the use of language for
reciprocal social communication is im paired in autism spectrum disorder.
Deficits in social-emotional reciprocity (i.e.,  the ability to engage with others and share
thoughts and feelings) are cl early evident in young children with the disorder, who may
show little or no initiation of social interaction and no sharing of emotions, along with re-
duced or absent imitation of others’ behavior . What language exists is often one-sided,
lacking in social reciprocity, and used to re quest or label rather th an to comment, share
feelings, or converse. In adults without inte llectual disabilities or language delays, deficits
in social-emotional reciprocity may be most apparent in difficulties processing and re-
sponding to complex social cues (e.g., when  and how to join a conversation, what not to
say). Adults who have developed compensation strategies for some social challenges still
struggle in novel or un supported situations and suffer fr om the effort and anxiety of con-
sciously calculating what is social ly intuitive for most individuals.
54 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Deficits in nonverbal communicative behavi ors used for social interaction are mani-
fested by absent, reduced, or atypical use of  eye contact (relative to cultural norms), ges-
tures, facial expressions, body  orientation, or speech intona tion. An early feature of autism
spectrum disorder is impaired joint attention as manifested by  a lack of pointing, showing,
or bringing objects to share interest with others, or failure to follow someone’s pointing or
eye gaze. Individuals may learn a few functional  gestures, but their re pertoire is smaller
than that of others, and they often fail to use expressive gestures spontaneously in com-
munication. Among adults with fluent language, the difficulty in coordinating nonverbal
communication with speech may give the impr ession of odd, wooden, or exaggerated
“body language” during interactions. Impairme nt may be relatively subtle within indi-
vidual modes (e.g., someone may have relati vely good eye contact when speaking) but
noticeable in poor integration of eye contact, gesture, body posture, prosody, and facial ex-
pression for social communication.
Deficits in developing, maintaining, an d understanding relationships should be
judged against norms for age, gender, and culture. There may be absent, reduced, or atyp-
ical social interest, manifested by rejectio n of others, passivity, or inappropriate ap-
proaches that seem aggressive or disruptive . These difficulties are particularly evident in
young children, in whom there is often a lack of shared social play and imagination (e.g.,
age-appropriate flexible pretend play) and, late r, insistence on playing by very fixed rules.
Older individuals may struggle to understand what behavior is considered appropriate in
one situation but not another (e.g., casual beha vior during a job interview), or the different
ways that language may be used to communic ate (e.g., irony, white lies). There may be an
apparent preference for solitary activities or  for interacting with much younger or older
people. Frequently, there is a de sire to establish friendships wi thout a complete or realistic
idea of what friendship entails (e.g., one-sid ed friendships or friendships based solely on
shared special interests). Relationships with siblings, co-workers, and caregivers are also
important to consider (i n terms of reciprocity).
Autism spectrum disorder is also defined by restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior,
interests, or activities (as specified in Criterion B), which show a range of manifestations
according to age and ability, intervention, and current supports. Stereotyped or repetitive
behaviors include simple motor stereotypies (e.g., hand flappi ng, finger flicking), repeti-
tive use of objects (e.g., spinning coins, linin g up toys), and repetitive speech (e.g., echola-
lia, the delayed or immediate parroting of heard words; use of “you” when referring to
self; stereotyped use of words, phrases, or pr osodic patterns). Exce ssive adherence to rou-
tines and restricted patterns of behavior may be manifest in resistance to change (e.g., dis-
tress at apparently small changes, such as in packaging of a favorite food; insistence on
adherence to rules; rigidity of thinking) or ri tualized patterns of ve rbal or nonverbal be-
havior (e.g., repetitive questioning, pacing a perimeter). Highly restricted, fixated interests
in autism spectrum disorder tend to be ab normal in intensity or  focus (e.g., a toddler
strongly attached to a pan; a child preoccupied with vacuum cleaners; an adult spending
hours writing out timetables). Some fascinations and routines may relate to apparent hy-
per- or hyporeactivity to sensory input, ma nifested through extreme responses to specific
sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touc hing of objects, fascination with lights or
spinning objects, and sometimes apparent indi fference to pain, heat, or cold. Extreme re-
action to or rituals involving taste, smell, te xture, or appearance of  food or excessive food
restrictions are common and ma y be a presenting feature of  autism spectrum disorder.
Many adults with autism spectrum disord er without intellectual or language disabili-
ties learn to suppress repetitive behavior in  public . Specia l interests may  be a source of
pleasure and motivation and provide avenues for education and employment later in life.
Diagnostic criteria may be met when restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests,
or activities were clearly pres ent during childhood or at some time in the past, even if
symptoms are no longer present.
Autism Spectrum Disorder 55
Criterion D requires that the features must ca use clinically significant impairment in so-
cial, occupational, or other impo rtant areas of current function ing. Criterion E specifies that
the social communication defici ts, although sometime s accompanied by intellectual disabil-
ity (intellectual developmental disorder), are not in line with the individual’s developmental
level; impairments exceed difficulties expected on the basis of developmental level.
Standardized behavioral diagnostic instruments with good psychometric properties,
including caregiver interviews, questionnair es and clinician observation measures, are
available and can improve re liability of diagnosis over time and across clinicians.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Many individuals with autism spectrum disorder also have intellectual impairment and/or
language impairment (e.g., slow  to talk, language comprehension behind production). Even
those with average or high inte lligence have an uneven profil e of abilities. The gap between
intellectual and adaptive function al skills is often large. Moto r deficits are often present, in-
cluding odd gait, clumsiness, and other abnormal  motor signs (e.g., walk ing on tiptoes). Self-
injury (e.g., head banging, biting the wris t) may occur, and disr uptive/challenging behav-
iors are more common in children and adoles cents with autism spectrum disorder than
other disorders, including intellectual disabili ty. Adolescents and adults with autism spec-
trum disorder are prone to anxiety and depres sion. Some individuals develop catatonic-like
motor behavior (slowing and “f reezing” mid-action), but thes e are typically not of the mag-
nitude of a catatonic episode. However, it is possible for individuals with autism spectrum
disorder to experience a marked deterioratio n in motor symptoms an d display a full cata-
tonic episode with symptoms such as mutism, posturing, grimacing and waxy flexibility.
The risk period for comorbid catatonia appears to be greate st in the adolescent years.
Prevalence 
In recent years, reported frequencies for au tism spectrum disorder  across U.S. and non-
U.S. countries have approached 1% of the po pulation, with similar estimates in child and
adult samples. It remains unclear whether high er rates reflect an expansion of the diag-
nostic criteria of DSM-IV to include subthreshold cases, increased awareness, differences
in study methodology, or a true increase in  the frequency of autism spectrum disorder.
Development and Course
The age and pattern of onset also should be noted for autism spectr um disorder. Symptoms
are typically recognized during th e second year of life (12–24 months of age) but may be seen
earlier than 12 months if developmental delays  are severe, or noted later than 24 months if
symptoms are more subtle. The pattern of onset description might include information
about early developmental delays or any losses of social or language skills. In cases where
skills have been lost, parents or caregivers may give a history of a gradual or relatively
rapid deterioration in social behaviors or lang uage skills. Typically, this would occur be-
tween 12 and 24 months of age and is distinguished from the rare instances of developmen-
tal regression occurring after at least 2 years of normal development (previously described
as childhood disintegrative disorder).
The behavioral features of autism spectrum  disorder first become evident in early
childhood, with some cases presenting a lack of  interest in social interaction in the first
year of life. Some children with autism spectrum disorder experience developmental pla-
teaus or regression, with a gradual or relatively rapid deterioration in social behaviors or
use of language, often du ring the first 2 years of life. Such losses are rare in other disor-
ders and may be a useful “red flag” for autism spectrum disorder. Much more unusual
and warranting more extensive medical invest igation are losses of skills beyond social
communication (e.g., loss of se lf-care, toileting, motor skills) or those occurring after the
56 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
second birthday (see also Rett syndrome in  the section “Differential Diagnosis” for this
disorder).
First symptoms of autism spectrum disorder frequently involve delayed language de-
velopment, often accompanied by lack of social interest or unusual social interactions (e.g.,
pulling individuals by the hand without any a ttempt to look at them ), odd play patterns
(e.g., carrying toys around but never pl aying with them), and unusual communication
patterns (e.g., knowing the alphabet but not responding to own name). Deafness may be
suspected but is typically ruled out. During the second year, odd and repetitive behaviors
and the absence of typical play become more apparent. Since many typically developing
young children have strong preferences and en joy repetition (e.g., eating the same foods,
watching the same vide o multiple times), dist inguishing restricted and repetitive behav-
iors that are diagnostic of autism spectrum disorder can be difficult in preschoolers. The
clinical distinction is based on the type, freq uency, and intensity of the behavior (e.g., a
child who daily lines up objects for hours an d is very distressed if any item is moved).
Autism spectrum disorder is not a degenera tive disorder, and it is typical for learning
and compensation to continue throughout life.  Symptoms are often most marked in early
childhood and early school years, with deve lopmental gains typical in later childhood in
at least some areas (e.g., increa sed interest in social interact ion). A small proportion of in-
dividuals deteriorate behaviorally during adolescence, whereas most others improve.
Only a minority of individuals with autism  spectrum disorder live and work indepen-
dently in adulthood; those who do  tend to have superior lang uage and intellectual abilities
and are able to find a niche that matches thei r special interests and skills. In general, indi-
viduals with lower levels of impairment may be better able to function independently.
However, even these individuals may remain socially naive and vulnerable, have difficul-
ties organizing practical dema nds without aid, and are pron e to anxiety and depression.
Many adults report using compensation strate gies and coping mechanisms to mask their
difficulties in public but suffer from the stress  and effort of maintaining a socially accept-
able facade. Scarcely anything is known ab out old age in autism  spectrum disorder.
Some individuals come for first diagnosis in  adulthood, perhaps prompted by the diagno-
sis of autism in a child in the family or a breakdown of relations at work or home. Obtaining de-
tailed developmental history in such  cases may be difficult, and it  is important to consider self-
reported difficulties. Where clinical observat ion suggests criteria are currently met, autism
spectrum disorder may be diagno sed, provided there is no evidence of good social and com-
munication skills in childhood. For example, the re port (by parents or another relative) that the
individual had ordinary and sustained recipr ocal friendships and good nonverbal communi-
cation skills throughout childhood would rule out a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder;
however, the absence of de velopmental information in itself should not do so.
Manifestations of the social and communication impairments and restricted/repeti-
tive behaviors that define autism spectrum d isorder are clear in th e developmental period.
In later life, intervention or compensation, as well as current supports, may mask these dif-
ficulties in at least some co ntexts. However, symptoms remain sufficient to cause current
impairment in social, occupational, or  other important areas of functioning.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
The best established prognostic factors for individual outcome wi thin autism spectrum
disorder are presence or absence of associa ted intellectual disability and language impair-
ment (e.g., functional language by age 5 years is a good prognostic sign) and additional
mental health problems. Epilepsy, as a comorb id diagnosis, is associated with greater in-
tellectual disability and lower verbal ability.
Environmental. A variety of nonspecific risk factors, such as advanced parental age, low
birth weight, or fetal exposure to valproate, may contribute to risk of autism spectrum dis-
order.
Autism Spectrum Disorder 57
Genetic and physiological. Heritability estimates for au tism spectrum disorder have
ranged from 37% to higher than 90%, based on  twin concordance rates. Currently, as many
as 15% of cases of autism spec trum disorder appear  to be associated with a known genetic
mutation, with different  de novo copy number variants or de novo mutations in specific
genes associated with the disorder in differ ent families. However, even when an autism
spectrum disorder is associated with a know n genetic mutation, it does not appear to be
fully penetrant. Risk for the remainder of case s appears to be polygenic, with perhaps hun-
dreds of genetic loci making relatively small contributions.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
Cultural differences will exist in norms for social interaction, no nverbal communication,
and relationships, but individuals with auti sm spectrum disorder are markedly impaired
against the norms for their cultural context. Cultural and socioeconomic factors may affect
age at recognition or diagnosis; for example, in the United Stat es, late or underdiagnosis of
autism spectrum disorder among Af rican American children may occur.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Autism spectrum disorder is di agnosed four times more often in males than in females. In
clinic samples, females tend to be more li kely to show accompanying intellectual disabil-
ity, suggesting that girls without accompan ying intellectual impairments or language
delays may go unrecognized, perhaps because of subtler manifestatio n of social and com-
munication difficulties.
Functional Consequences of  Autism Spectrum Disorder
In young children with autism spectrum diso rder, lack of social and communication abil-
ities may hamper learning, especially learning through social interaction or in settings
with peers. In the home, insistence on rout ines and aversion to change, as well as sensory
sensitivities, may interfere with eating and sleeping and make routine care (e.g., haircuts,
dental work) extremely difficult. Adaptive skills are typically below measured IQ. Ex-
treme difficulties in planning, organization , and coping with change negatively impact
academic achievement, even fo r students with above-average intelligence. During adult-
hood, these indivi duals may have difficulties establishing independence because of con-
tinued rigidity and difficulty with novelty.
Many individuals with autism spectrum d isorder, even without intellectual disability,
have poor adult psychosocial functioning as indexed by measures such as independent
living and gainful employment. Functional cons equences in old age are unknown, but so-
cial isolation and communication problems (e .g., reduced help-seeking) are likely to have
consequences for health in older adulthood.
Differential Diagnosis 
Rett syndrome. Disruption of social interaction ma y be observed during the regressive
phase of Rett syndrome (typic ally between 1–4 years of age); thus, a substantial proportion
of affected young girls may ha ve a presentation that meets diagnostic criteria for autism
spectrum disorder. Howe ver, after this period, most individuals with Rett syndrome im-
prove their social communication skills, and auti stic features are no longer a major area of
concern. Consequently, autism spectrum disorder should be considered only when all di-
agnostic criteria are met.
Selective mutism. In selective mutism, early develo pment is not typically disturbed.
The affected child usually exhibits appropriate communication skills in certain contexts
and settings. Even in settings where the child is mute, social reciprocity is not impaired,
nor are restricted or repetitive patterns of behavior present.
58 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Language disorders and social (p ragmatic) communi cation disorder. In some forms
of language disorder, there may be problems  of communication an d some secondary so-
cial difficulties. However, specific language disorder is not usually associated with abnor-
mal nonverbal communication, no r with the presence of restricted, repetitive patterns of
behavior, interests, or activities.
When an individual shows impairment in social communication and social interactions
but does not show restricted and repetitive beha vior or interests, criteria for social (prag-
matic) communication disorder, instead of autism spectrum disorder, may be met. The di-
agnosis of autism spectrum disorder supersedes that of so cial (pragmatic) communication
disorder whenever the criteria for autism spectrum disorder  are met, and care should be
taken to enquire carefully regarding past or current restricted/repetitive behavior.
Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) wit hout autism spectrum
disorder. Intellectual disability without autism spectrum disorder may be difficult to
differentiate from autism spectrum disorder in very young children. Individuals with in-
tellectual disability who have not developed language or symbolic skills also present a
challenge for differential diagnos is, since repetitive behavior often occurs in such individ-
uals as well. A diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder in an indivi dual with intellectual
disability is appropriate when social communi cation and interaction are significantly im-
paired relative to the developmental level of the individual’s nonverbal skills (e.g., fine
motor skills, nonverbal problem solving). In cont rast, intellectual  disability is the appropri-
ate diagnosis when there is no apparent di screpancy between the le vel of social-commu-
nicative skills and other intellectual skills.
Stereotypic movement disorder. Motor stereotypies are among the diagnostic charac-
teristics of autism spectrum disorder, so an additional diagnosis of stereotypic movement
disorder is not given when such repetitive be haviors are better explained by the presence
of autism spectrum disorder. However, when stereotypies cause self-injury and become a
focus of treatment, both diagnoses may be appropriate.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Abnormalities of attention (overly focused or
easily distracted) are common in individuals with autism spectrum disorder, as is hy-
peractivity. A diagnosi s of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disord er (ADHD) should be
considered when attentional difficulties or hyperactivity exceeds that typically seen in in-
dividuals of comparable mental age.
Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia with childhood onset usually develops after a period of
normal, or near normal, development. A prod romal state has been described in which so-
cial impairment and atypical interests and belie fs occur, which could be confused with the
social deficits seen in autism spectrum d isorder. Hallucinations and delusions, which are
defining features of schizophrenia, are not features of autism spectrum disorder. How-
ever, clinicians must take into account the potential for individual s with autism spectrum
disorder to be concrete in their interpretati on of questions regarding the key features of
schizophrenia (e.g., “Do you he ar voices when no one is th ere?” ”Yes [on the radio]”).
Comorbidity
Autism spectrum disorder is frequently assoc iated with intellectual impairment and struc-
tural language disorder (i.e., an inability to  comprehend and construc t sentences with proper
grammar), which should be noted under the relevant specifiers when applicable. Many in-
dividuals with autism spectrum disorder have psychiatric sympto ms that do not form part of
the diagnostic criteria for the disorder (about 70% of individuals with autism spectrum dis-
order may have one comorbid mental disord er, and 40% may have two or more comorbid
mental disorders). When criteria for both ADHD and autism spectrum disorder are met, both
diagnoses should be given. This same principle applies to concurrent diagnoses of autism
spectrum disorder and developmental coordina tion disorder, anxiety disorders, depressive
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 59
disorders, and other comorbid diagnoses. Among individuals who are nonverbal or have
language deficits, observable si gns such as changes in sleep or  eating and increases in chal-
lenging behavior should trigger an evaluation fo r anxiety or depression. Specific learning dif-
ficulties (literacy and numeracy ) are common, as is developm ental coordination disorder.
Medical conditions commonly associated with autism spectrum disorder should be noted
under the “associated with a known medical/ge netic or environmental/acquired condition”
specifier. Such medical conditions include epilepsy, sleep proble ms, and constipation.
Avoidant-restrictive food intake disorder is a fairly frequent presenting feature of autism
spectrum disorder, and extreme and na rrow food preferences may persist. 
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity 
Disorder
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. A persistent pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with
functioning or development, as characterized by (1) and/or (2):
1.Inattention:  Six (or more) of the following symptoms have persisted for at least
6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level and that nega-
tively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational activities:
Note:  The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of oppositional behavior, defi-
ance, hostility, or failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents
and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are required.
a. Often fails to give close attention to details or makes careless mistakes in
schoolwork, at work, or during other activities (e.g., overlooks or misses details,
work is inaccurate).
b. Often has difficulty sustaining attention in tasks or play activities (e.g., has diffi-
culty remaining focused during lectures, conversations, or lengthy reading).
c. Often does not seem to listen when spoken to directly (e.g., mind seems else-
where, even in the absence of any obvious distraction).
d. Often does not follow through on instructions and fails to finish schoolwork,
chores, or duties in the workplace (e.g., starts tasks but quickly loses focus and
is easily sidetracked).
e. Often has difficulty organizing tasks and activities (e.g., difficulty managing se-
quential tasks; difficulty keeping materials and belongings in order; messy, dis-
organized work; has poor time management; fails to meet deadlines).
f. Often avoids, dislikes, or is reluctant to engage in tasks that require sustained
mental effort (e.g., schoolwork or hom ework; for older adolescents and adults,
preparing reports, completing form s, reviewing lengthy papers).
g. Often loses things necessary for tasks or activities (e.g., school materials, pen-
cils, books, tools, wallets, keys, paperwork, eyeglasses, mobile telephones). 
h. Is often easily distracted by extraneous stimuli (for older adolescents and
adults, may include unrelated thoughts).
i. Is often forgetful in daily activities (e.g., doing chores, running errands; for older
adolescents and adults, returning calls, paying bills, keeping appointments).
60 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
2.Hyperactivity and impulsivity:  Six (or more) of the following symptoms have per-
sisted for at least 6 months to a degree that is inconsistent with developmental level
and that negatively impacts directly on social and academic/occupational activities:
Note:  The symptoms are not solely a manifestation of opposition al behavior, defi-
ance, hostility, or a failure to understand tasks or instructions. For older adolescents
and adults (age 17 and older), at least five symptoms are required.
a. Often fidgets with or taps hands or feet or squirms in seat.
b. Often leaves seat in situations when remaining seated is expected (e.g., leaves
his or her place in the classroom, in the office or other workplace, or in other
situations that require remaining in place).
c. Often runs about or climbs in situations where it is inappropriate. ( Note:  In ad-
olescents or adults, may be limited to feeling restless.)
d. Often unable to play or engage in leisure activities quietly.
e. Is often “on the go,” acting as if “driven by a motor” (e.g., is unable to be or un-
comfortable being still for extended time, as in restaurants, meetings; may be
experienced by others as being restless or difficult to keep up with).
f. Often talks excessively.
g. Often blurts out an answer before a question has been completed (e.g., com-
pletes people’s sentences; cannot wait for turn in conversation).
h. Often has difficulty waiting his or her turn (e.g., while waiting in line).
i. Often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., butts into conversations, games, or
activities; may start using other people’s things without asking or receiving per-
mission; for adolescents and adults, may intrude into or take over what others
are doing).
B. Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms were present prior to age
12 years.
C. Several inattentive or hyperactive-impulsive symptoms are present in two or more set-
tings (e.g., at home, school, or work; with friends or relatives; in other activities).
D. There is clear evidence that the symptoms interfere with, or reduce the quality of, so-
cial, academic, or occupational functioning.
E. The symptoms do not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia or another
psychotic disorder and are not better explai ned by another mental disorder (e.g., mood
disorder, anxiety disorder, dissociative diso rder, personality disorder, substance intox-
ication or withdrawal).
Specify whether:
314.01 (F90.2) Combined presentation:  If both Criterion A1 (inattention) and Crite-
rion A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) are met for the past 6 months.
314.00 (F90.0) Predominantly inattentive presentation:  If Criterion A1 (inattention)
is met but Criterion A2 (hyperactivity-impulsivity) is not met for the past 6 months.
314.01 (F90.1) Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation:  If Criterion A2 (hy-
peractivity-impulsivity) is met and Criterion A1 (inattention) is not met for the past 6 months.
Specify if:
In partial remission:  When full criteria were previously met, fewer than the full criteria
have been met for the past 6 months, and the symptoms still result in impairment in
social, academic, or occupational functioning.
Specify current severity:
Mild:  Few, if any, symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis are
present, and symptoms result in no more than minor impairments in social or occupa-
tional functioning.
Moderate: Symptoms or functional impairment between “mild” and “severe” are present.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 61
Severe:  Many symptoms in excess of those required to make the diagnosis, or several
symptoms that are particularly severe, are present, or the symptoms result in marked
impairment in social or occupational functioning.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of attent ion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a persistent
pattern of inattention and/or hyperactivity-impulsivity that interferes with functioning or
development. Inattention  manifests behaviorally in ADHD as wandering off task, lacking
persistence, having difficulty sustaining focus, and being disorganized and is not due to
defiance or lack of comprehension. Hyperactivity  refers to excessive motor activity (such as
a child running about) when it is not appropriat e, or excessive fidgeting, tapping, or talk-
ativeness. In adults, hyperactivity may manife st as extreme restlessness or wearing others
out with their activity. Impulsivity  refers to hasty actions that  occur in the moment without
forethought and that have high potential for harm to the individual (e.g., darting into the
street without looking). Impulsivity may reflec t a desire for immediate rewards or an in-
ability to delay gratification.  Impulsive behaviors may manifest as social intrusiveness
(e.g., interrupting others excessively) and/ or as making important decisions without con-
sideration of long-term consequences (e.g., taking a job without ad equate information).
ADHD begins in childhood. The requirement that several symptoms  be present before
age 12 years conveys the importance of a substantial clinical presentation during child-
hood. At the same time, an earlier age at onset is not specified because of difficulties in es-
tablishing precise childhood onset retrospectively. Adult recall of childhood symptoms
tends to be unreliable, and it is bene ficial to obtain ancillary information.
Manifestations of the disorder must be presen t in more than one setting (e.g., home and
school, work). Confirmation of substantial symptoms across settings typically cannot be
done accurately without consulting informants who have seen the individual in those set-
tings. Typically, symptoms vary depending on context within a given setting. Signs of the
disorder may be minimal or absent when the individual is receiving frequent rewards for
appropriate behavior, is under close supervision,  is in a novel setting, is engaged in espe-
cially interesting activities, has consistent exte rnal stimulation (e.g., via electronic screens),
or is interacting in one-on-one situa tions (e.g., the clinician's office).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Mild delays in language, motor,  or social development are not specific to ADHD but often co-
occur. Associated features may in clude low frustration tolerance, irritability, or mood lability.
Even in the absence of a specific learning disorder, academic or work performance is often im-
paired. Inattentive behavior is associated with various underlying cognit ive processes, and in-
dividuals with ADHD may exhibit cognitive pr oblems on tests of attention, executive
function, or memory, although these tests are not suff iciently sensitive or specific to serve as di-
agnostic indices. By early adulthood, ADHD is a ssociated with an increased risk of suicide at-
tempt, primarily when comorbid with mood, conduct, or substance use disorders.
No biological marker is diagnostic for AD HD. As a group, compared with peers, chil-
dren with ADHD display incr eased slow wave electroenc ephalograms, reduced total
brain volume on magnetic resonance imaging, and possibly a delay in posterior to anterior
cortical maturation, but thes e findings are not diagnostic . In the uncommon cases where
there is a known genetic cause (e.g., Fragile  X syndrome, 22q11 deletion syndrome), the
ADHD presentation should still be diagnosed.
Prevalence
Population surveys sugge st that ADHD occurs in most cultures in about 5% of children
and about 2.5% of adults.
62 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Development and Course
Many parents first observe excessive motor activity when the child is a toddler, but symp-
toms are difficult to distinguish from highly  variable normative be haviors before age 4
years. ADHD is most often identified during elementary school years, and inattention be-
comes more prominent and impairing. The disord er is relatively stable through early ad-
olescence, but some individuals have a worsened course wi th development of antisocial
behaviors. In most individuals with ADHD , symptoms of motoric hyperactivity become
less obvious in adolescence and adulthood, bu t difficulties with restlessness, inattention,
poor planning, and impulsivity persist. A subs tantial proportion of children with ADHD
remain relatively impa ired into adulthood.
In preschool, the main manifestation is hyperactivity. Inattentio n becomes more prom-
inent during elementary school. During adoles cence, signs of hypera ctivity (e.g., running
and climbing) are less common and may be conf ined to fidgetiness or an inner feeling of
jitteriness, restlessness, or im patience. In adulthood, along wi th inattention and restless-
ness, impulsivity may remain problematic ev en when hyperactivity has diminished.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. ADHD is associated with reduced be havioral inhibition, effortful con-
trol, or constraint; negative emotionality; an d/or elevated novelty seeking. These traits
may predispose some children to ADHD bu t are not specific to the disorder.
Environmental. Very low birth weight (less than 1,500 grams) conveys a two- to three-
fold risk for ADHD, but most children with low birth weig ht do not develop ADHD. Al-
though ADHD is correlated with smoking du ring pregnancy, some of this association
reflects common genetic risk. A minority of c ases may be related to reactions to aspects of
diet. There may be a history of child abuse, neglect, multiple  foster placements, neurotoxin
exposure (e.g., lead), infectio ns (e.g., encephalitis), or alcohol exposure in utero. Exposure
to environmental toxicants has been correlat ed with subsequent ADHD, but it is not
known whether these associations are causal.
Genetic and physiological. ADHD is elevated in the firs t-degree biological relatives of
individuals with ADHD. The heritability of AD HD is substantial. While specific genes
have been correlated with ADHD, they are ne ither necessary nor sufficient causal factors.
Visual and hearing impairments, metabolic abnormalities, sleep  disorders, nutritional de-
ficiencies, and epilepsy should be considered as possible influences on ADHD symptoms.
ADHD is not associated with specific physic al features, although  rates of minor phys-
ical anomalies (e.g., hypertelorism, highly arched palate, low-set ears) may be relatively
elevated. Subtle motor delays and other neur ological soft signs may occur. (Note that
marked co-occurring clumsiness and motor delays should be coded separately [e.g., de-
velopmental coordina tion disorder].)
Course modifiers. Family interaction patterns in ea rly childhood are unlikely to cause
ADHD but may influence its course or contri bute to secondary development of conduct
problems.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Differences in ADHD prevalence rates across re gions appear attributable mainly to differ-
ent diagnostic and methodological practices. However, there also may be cultural varia-
tion in attitudes toward or interpretations of children’s behaviors. Clinical identification
rates in the United States for African Americ an and Latino populations tend to be lower
than for Caucasian populations. Informant symptom ratings may be influenced by cul-
tural group of the child and the informant, su ggesting that culturally appropriate practices
are relevant in assessing ADHD.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 63
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
ADHD is more frequent in males than in fema les in the general population, with a ratio of
approximately 2:1 in children and 1.6:1 in ad ults. Females are more likely than males to
present primarily with inattentive features.
Functional Consequences of 
Attention-Deficit/Hy peractivity Disorder
ADHD is associated with reduced school performance and academic attainment, social re-
jection, and, in adults, poorer occupation al performance, attainment, attendance, and
higher probability of unemployment as well as elevated interpersonal conflict. Children
with ADHD are significantly more likely than  their peers without ADHD to develop con-
duct disorder in adolescence and antisocial  personality disorder in adulthood, conse-
quently increasing the likelihood for substance use disorders and incarceration. The risk of
subsequent substance use disorders is elevated, especially when conduct disorder or an-
tisocial personality disorder develops. Individuals with ADHD are more likely than peers
to be injured. Traffic accidents and violatio ns are more frequent in drivers with ADHD.
There may be an elevated likelihood of  obesity among individuals with ADHD.
Inadequate or variable self-app lication to tasks that require sustained effort is often in-
terpreted by others as laziness , irresponsibility, or failure to  cooperate. Family relation-
ships may be characterized by discord and ne gative interactions. Peer relationships are
often disrupted by peer rejection, neglect, or  teasing of the individual with ADHD. On av-
erage, individuals with ADHD obtain less schooling, have poorer vocational achievement,
and have reduced intellectual scores than their peers, although there is great variability. In
its severe form, the disorder is markedly impairing, affecting social, familial, and scholas-
tic/occupational adjustment.
Academic deficits, school-relat ed problems, and peer neglect tend to be most associ-
ated with elevated symptoms of  inattention, whereas peer reje ction and, to a lesser extent,
accidental injury are most salient with mark ed symptoms of hyperactivity or impulsivity.
Differential Diagnosis
Oppositional defiant disorder. Individuals with oppositional defiant disorder may re-
sist work or school tasks that require self-application because they resist conforming to
others' demands. Their behavior is characte rized by negativity, hostility, and defiance.
These symptoms must be differentiated from aversion to school or mentally demanding
tasks due to difficulty in sustaining mental effort, forgetting instructions, and impulsivity
in individuals with ADHD. Complicating the di fferential diagnosis is the fact that some
individuals with ADHD may develop secondary oppositional attitudes toward such tasks
and devalue their importance.
Intermittent explosive disorder. ADHD and intermittent expl osive disorder share high
levels of impulsive behavior. However, indi viduals with intermitte nt explosive disorder
show serious aggression toward others, which is not characteristic of ADHD, and they do
not experience problems with sustaining atte ntion as seen in ADHD. In addition, intermit-
tent explosive disorder is rare in childhood. Intermittent explosive disorder may be diag-
nosed in the presence of ADHD.
Other neurodevelopmental disorders. The increased motoric acti vity that may occur in
ADHD must be distinguished from the repetiti ve motor behavior that  characterizes stereo-
typic movement disorder and some cases of autism spectr um disorder. In stereotypic
movement disorder, the motoric be havior is generally fixed and repetitive (e.g., body rock-
ing, self-biting), whereas the fidgetiness and restlessness in ADHD are typically general-
ized and not characterized by repetitive ster eotypic movements. In Tourette’s disorder,
64 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
frequent multiple tics can be mistaken for the generalized fidgetiness of ADHD. Prolonged
observation may be needed to differentiate fidgetiness from bouts of multiple tics.
Specific learning disorder. Children with specific learning disorder may appear inat-
tentive because of frustration, lack of interest, or limited ab ility. However, inattention in
individuals with a specific learning disorder  who do not have ADHD is not impairing out-
side of academic work.
Intellectual disability (intell ectual developmental disorder). Symptoms of ADHD are
common among children placed in academic sett ings that are inappropriate to their intel-
lectual ability. In such cases, the symptoms are not evident during non-academic tasks. A
diagnosis of ADHD in intellectual disability requires that inattention or hyperactivity be
excessive for mental age.
Autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with ADHD and those with autism spectrum
disorder exhibit inattention, social dysfunction, and difficult-to-manage behavior. The so-
cial dysfunction and peer rejection seen in individuals with ADHD must be distinguished
from the social disengagement, isolation, an d indifference to facial and tonal communica-
tion cues seen in individuals with autism sp ectrum disorder. Childr en with autism spec-
trum disorder may display tantru ms because of an inability to tolerate a change from their
expected course of events. In contrast, child ren with ADHD may misbehave or have a tan-
trum during a major transition because of impulsivity or poor self-control.
Reactive attachment disorder. Children with reactive attachment disorder may show
social disinhibition, but not the full ADHD symptom cluster, and display other features
such as a lack of enduring relationship s that are not characteristic of ADHD.
Anxiety disorders. ADHD shares symptoms of inattent ion with anxiety disorders. Indi-
viduals with ADHD are inattentive because of their attraction to external stimuli, new
activities, or preoccupation with  enjoyable activities. This is distinguished from the inat-
tention due to worry and rumination seen in anxiety disorders. Restlessness might be seen
in anxiety disorders. Howeve r, in ADHD, the symptom is not associated with worry and
rumination.
Depressive disorders. Individuals with depressive diso rders may present with inabil-
ity to concentrate. However,  poor concentration in mood disorders becomes prominent
only during a depressive episode.
Bipolar disorder. Individuals with bipola r disorder may have increased activity, poor
concentration, and increased impulsivity, bu t these features are episodic, occurring sev-
eral days at a time. In bipolar disorder, increased impulsivity or inattention is accompa-
nied by elevated mood, grandiosity, and ot her specific bipolar features. Children with
ADHD may show significant changes in mood within the same day; such lability is dis-
tinct from a manic episode, which must last 4 or more days to be a clinical indicator of bi-
polar disorder, even in childre n. Bipolar disorder is rare in preadolescents, even when
severe irritability and anger are prominent,  whereas ADHD is common among children
and adolescents who display excessive anger and irritability.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder. Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is
characterized by pervasive irritability, and intolerance of frustratio n, but impulsiveness
and disorganized attention are not essential features. However, most  children and adoles-
cents with the disorder have symptoms that also meet crit eria for ADHD, which is diag-
nosed separately.
Substance use disorders. Differentiating ADHD from su bstance use disorders may be
problematic if the first presentation of ADHD symptoms follows the onset of abuse or fre-
quent use. Clear evidence of ADHD before su bstance misuse from informants or previous
records may be essential for differential diagnosis.
Other Specified Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder 65
Personality disorders. In adolescents and adults, it may be difficult to distinguish ADHD
from borderline, narcissistic, and other person ality disorders. All these disorders tend to
share the features of disorganization, social  intrusiveness, emotional dysregulation, and
cognitive dysregulation. Howe ver, ADHD is not characterized by fear of abandonment,
self-injury, extreme ambivalence, or other fe atures of personality disorder. It may take
extended clinical observation, informant interview, or detailed history to distinguish im-
pulsive, socially intrusive, or inappropriate behavior from narcissist ic, aggressive, or dom-
ineering behavior to make this differential diagnosis.
Psychotic disorders. ADHD is not diagnosed if the symp toms of inattention and hyperac-
tivity occur exclusively during the course of a psychotic disorder.
Medication-induced symptoms of ADHD. Symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity, or
impulsivity attributable to the use of medication (e.g., bron chodilators, isoniazid, neuro-
leptics [resulting in akathisia], thyroid replacement medication) are diagnosed as other
specified or unspecified other (or un known) substance–related disorders.
Neurocognitive disorders. Early major neurocognitive disorder (dementia) and/or
mild neurocognitive disorder are not known to  be associated with ADHD but may present
with similar clinical features. These conditions are distinguished from ADHD by their late
onset.
Comorbidity
In clinical settings, comorbid  disorders are frequent in individuals whose symptoms meet
criteria for ADHD. In the general population, oppositional defiant di sorder co-occurs with
ADHD in approximately half of children wi th the combined presentation and about a
quarter with the predominantly inattentive presentation. Conduct disorder co-occurs in
about a quarter of children or adolescents with the combined presentation, depending on
age and setting. Most children and adolescent s with disruptive mood dysregulation dis-
order have symptoms that also meet criteria  for ADHD; a lesser percentage of children
with ADHD have symptoms that meet criter ia for disruptive mood dysregulation disor-
der. Specific learning disorder commonly co-occurs with ADHD. Anxiety disorders and
major depressive disorder occur in a minority  of individuals with ADHD but more often
than in the general population. Intermittent explosive disorder occu rs in a minority of
adults with ADHD, but at rates above population levels. Although substance use disor-
ders are relatively more frequent among adul ts with ADHD in the general population, the
disorders are present in only a minority of adults with AD HD. In adults, antisocial and
other personality disorders may co-occur with ADHD. Other disorders that may co-occur
with ADHD include obsessive-compulsive diso rder, tic disorders, and autism spectrum
disorder.
Other Specified Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder
314.01 (F90.8)
This category applies to presentations in wh ich symptoms characteristic of attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder that cause clinic ally significant distress or impairment in so-
cial, occupational or other important areas of  functioning predominate but do not meet the
full criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or any of the disorders in the neuro-
developmental disorders diagnostic class. The other specified attention-deficit/hyperactiv-
ity disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate
66 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder or any specific neur odevelopmental disorder. This is done by re-
cording “other specified attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder” followed by the specific
reason (e.g., “with insufficient inattention symptoms”). 
Unspecified Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder
314.01 (F90.9)
This category applies to presentations in wh ich symptoms characteristic of attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder that cause clinic ally significant distress or impairment in so-
cial, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the
full criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or any of the disorders in the neuro-
developmental disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the rea-
son that the criteria are not met for attention- deficit/hyperactivity disorder or for a specific
neurodevelopmental disorder, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient in-
formation to make a more specific diagnosis. 
Specific Learning Disorder
Specific Learning Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. Difficulties learning and using academic skills,  as indicated by the presence of at least
one of the following symptoms that have persisted for at least 6 months, despite the
provision of interventions that target those difficulties:
1. Inaccurate or slow and effortful word reading (e.g., reads single words aloud incor-
rectly or slowly and hesitantly, frequently guesses words, has difficulty sounding
out words).
2. Difficulty understanding the meaning of what is read (e.g., may read text accurately
but not understand the sequence, relationships, inferences, or deeper meanings of
what is read).
3. Difficulties with spelling (e.g., may add, omit, or substitute vowels or consonants).
4. Difficulties with written expression (e.g., makes multiple grammatical or punctua-
tion errors within sentences; employs poor paragraph organization; written expres-
sion of ideas lacks clarity).
5. Difficulties mastering number sense, number  facts, or calculation (e.g., has poor
understanding of numbers, their magnitude, and relationships; counts on fingers to
add single-digit numbers instead of recalling the math fact as peers do; gets lost in
the midst of arithmetic computation and may switch procedures).
6. Difficulties with mathematical reasoning (e.g., has severe difficulty applying math-
ematical concepts, facts, or procedures to solve quantitative problems).
Specific Learning Disorder 67
B. The affected academic skills are substantially and quantifiably below those expected
for the individual’s chronological age, and cause significant interference with academic
or occupational performance, or with activiti es of daily living, as confirmed by individu-
ally administered standardized achievement measures and comprehensive clinical
assessment. For individuals age 17 years and older, a documented history of impairing
learning difficulties may be substituted for the standardized assessment.
C. The learning difficulties begin during school-age years but may not become fully man-
ifest until the demands for those affected academic skills exceed the individual’s lim-
ited capacities (e.g., as in timed tests, reading or writing lengthy complex reports for a
tight deadline, excessively heavy academic loads).
D. The learning difficulties are not better accounted for by intellectual disabilities, uncor-
rected visual or auditory acuity, other mental or neurological disorders, psychosocial
adversity, lack of proficiency in the language of academic instruction, or inadequate
educational instruction.
Note:  The four diagnostic criteria are to be met based on a clinical synthesis of the indi-
vidual’s history (developmental, medical, fa mily, educational), school reports, and psycho-
educational assessment.
Coding note:  Specify all academic domains and subskills that are impaired. When more
than one domain is impaired, each one should be coded individually according to the fol-
lowing specifiers.
Specify if:
315.00 (F81.0) With impairment in reading:
Word reading accuracy
Reading rate or fluency
Reading comprehension
Note:  Dyslexia  is an alternative term used to refer to a pattern of learning difficulties
characterized by problems with accurate or fluent word recognition, poor decoding,
and poor spelling abilities. If dyslexia is used to specify this particular pattern of dif-
ficulties, it is important also to specify any additional difficulties that are present,
such as difficulties with reading comprehension or math reasoning.
315.2 (F81.81) With impairme nt in written expression:
Spelling accuracy
Grammar and punctuation accuracy
Clarity or organization of written expression
315.1 (F81.2) With impairment in mathematics:
Number sense
Memorization of arithmetic facts
Accurate or fluent calculation
Accurate math reasoning
Note:  Dyscalculia  is an alternative term used to refer to a pattern of difficulties char-
acterized by problems processing numerical information, learning arithmetic facts,
and performing accurate or fluent calculations. If dyscalculia is used to specify this
particular pattern of mathematic difficulties, it is important also to specify any addi-
tional difficulties that are present, such as difficulties with math reasoning or word rea-
soning accuracy.
Specify current severity:
Mild:  Some difficulties learning skills in one or two academic domains, but of mild enough
severity that the individual may be able to compensate or function well when provided with
appropriate accommodations or support services, especially during the school years.
68 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Moderate: Marked difficulties learning skills in one or more academic domains, so that
the individual is unlikely to become proficient without some intervals of intensive and
specialized teaching during the school years. Some accommodations or supportive
services at least part of the day at school, in the workplace, or at home may be needed
to complete activities accurately and efficiently.
Severe:  Severe difficulties learning skills, affecting several academic domains, so that
the individual is unlikely to learn those skills without ongoing intensive individualized
and specialized teaching for most of the school years. Even with an array of appropri-
ate accommodations or services at home, at school, or in the workplace, the individual
may not be able to complete all activities efficiently.
Recording Procedures
Each impaired academic domain and subskill of specific learning disorder should be re-
corded. Because of ICD coding requirements, im pairments in reading, impairments in writ-
ten expression, and impairments in mathematics, with their corresponding impairments in
subskills, must be coded sepa rately. For example, impairments in reading and mathematics
and impairments in the subskills of reading rate or fluency, reading comprehension, accu-
rate or fluent calculation, and accurate math reasoning would be coded and recorded as
315.00 (F81.0) specific learning disorder with impairment in reading, with impairment in
reading rate or fluency and impairment in reading comprehension; 315.1 (F81.2) specific
learning disorder with impairment in mathemat ics, with impairment in accurate or fluent
calculation and impairment in  accurate math reasoning.
Diagnostic Features
Specific learning disorder is a neurodevelopmental  disorder with a biological origin that is
the basis for abnormalities at a cognitive level that are associated with the behavioral signs
of the disorder. The biological origin includes an interaction of geneti c, epigenetic, and en-
vironmental factors, which affect the brain’s ab ility to perceive or process verbal or non-
verbal information efficiently and accurately.
One essential feature of specific learning diso rder is persistent diff iculties learning key-
stone academic skills (Criterion A), with onset duri ng the years of formal schooling (i.e., the de-
velopmental period). Key academic skills incl ude reading of single words accurately and
fluently, reading comprehension,  written expression and spelling, arithmetic calculation, and
mathematical reasoning (solving mathematical problems). In contrast to talking or walking,
which are acquired developmenta l milestones that emerge wi th brain maturation, academic
skills (e.g., reading, spelling, writing, mathematic s) have to be taught and learned explicitly.
Specific learning disorder disrupts the normal pa ttern of learning academ ic skills; it is not sim-
ply a consequence of lack of o pportunity of learning or inadeq uate instruction. Difficulties
mastering these key academic skills may also impe de learning in other academic subjects (e.g.,
history, science, social studies) , but those problems are attributable to difficulties learning the
underlying academic skills. Difficulties learning  to map letters with the sounds of one’s lan-
guage—to read printed words (often called dyslexia)—is one of the most common manifesta-
tions of specific learning disord er. The learning difficulties manifest as a range of observable,
descriptive behaviors or symptoms (as listed in Criteria A1–A6). These clinical symptoms may
be observed, probed by means of the clinical interview, or ascert ained from school reports, rat-
ing scales, or descriptions in previous educational or psychological assessments. The learning
difficulties are persistent, not transitory. In ch ildren and adolescents, persistence  is defined as
restricted progress in learning (i.e., no evidence that the individual is catching up with class-
mates) for at least 6 months despite the provision of extra help at home or school. For example,
difficulties learning to read si ngle words that do not fully or rapidly remit with the provision of
instruction in phonological skills or word iden tification strategies may indicate a specific
Specific Learning Disorder 69
learning disorder. Evidence of persistent learning difficulties  may be derived from cumulative
school reports, portfolios of the child’s evalua ted work, curriculum-based measures, or clinical
interview. In adults, persistent difficulty refers  to ongoing difficulties in literacy or numeracy
skills that manifest during childhood or adol escence, as indicated by cumulative evidence
from school reports, evaluated portfo lios of work, or previous assessments.
A second key feature is that the individual’s performance of the affected academic skills is
well below average for age (Criterion B). One robust clinical indicator of difficulties learning
academic skills is low academic achievement for age or average achievement that is sustain-
able only by extraordinarily high levels of effort  or support. In children, the low academic skills
cause significant interference in school performance (as indicated by school reports and
teacher’s grades or ratings). Another clinical indicator, particularly in adults, is avoidance of
activities that require the academic skills. Also in adulthood, low academic  skills interfere with
occupational performance or everyday activities  requiring those skills (as indicated by self-re-
port or report by others). However, this criterion also requires psycho metric evidence from an
individually administered, psychometrically s ound and culturally appropriate test of aca-
demic achievement that is norm -referenced or criter ion-referenced. Academic skills are dis-
tributed along a continuum, so there is no natural cutpoint that can be used to differentiate
individuals with and without spec ific learning disorder. Thus, any threshold used to specify
what constitutes significantly low academic achi evement (e.g., academic skills well below age
expectation) is to a large extent arbitrary. Lo w achievement scores on one or more standard-
ized tests or subtests within an academic domain (i.e., at least 1.5 standard deviations [SD] be-
low the population mean for age, which translates to a standard score of 78 or less, which is
below the 7th percentile) are need ed for the greatest diagnostic certainty. However, precise
scores will vary according to the particular standardized tests that are used. On the basis of
clinical judgment, a more leni ent threshold may be used (e.g., 1.0–2.5 SD below the pop-
ulation mean for age), when learning diffic ulties are supported by  converging evidence
from clinical assessment, academic history, school reports, or test  scores. Moreover, since
standardized tests are not available in all languages, the diagnosis may then be based in
part on clinical judgment of sc ores on available test measures.
A third core feature is that the learning di fficulties are readily apparent in the early
school years in most individuals (Criterion C) . However, in others, the learning difficulties
may not manifest fully until later school year s, by which time learning demands have in-
creased and exceed the individual’s limited capacities.
Another key diagnostic feature is that the learning difficulties  are considered “spe-
cific,” for four reasons. First, they are not attr ibutable to intellectual disabilities (intellec-
tual disability [intellectual developmenta l disorder]); global developmental delay;
hearing or vision disorders, or neurological or motor disorders) (Criterion D). Specific
learning disorder affects lear ning in individuals who othe rwise demonstrate normal lev-
els of intellectual functioning (generally estima ted by an IQ score of greater than about 70
[±5 points allowing for measurement error ]). The phrase “unexpected academic under-
achievement” is often cited as the defining ch aracteristic of specific learning disorder in
that the specific learning disabilities are not part of a more general learning difficulty as
manifested in intellectual disability or global developmental delay. Specific learning dis-
order may also occur in individuals identified  as intellectually “gifted.” These individuals
may be able to sustain apparently adequate  academic functioning by using compensatory
strategies, extraordinarily high effort, or su pport, until the learning demands or assess-
ment procedures (e.g., timed tests) pose barri ers to their demonstrating their learning or
accomplishing required tasks. Second, the lear ning difficulty cannot be  attributed to more
general external factors, such as economic or environmental disadvantage, chronic absen-
teeism, or lack of education as typically prov ided in the individual’s community context.
Third, the learning difficulty canno t be attributed to a neurol ogical (e.g., pediatric stroke)
or motor disorders or to vision or hearing di sorders, which are often associated with prob-
lems learning academic skills but are distinguishable by presence of neurological signs.
70 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Finally, the learning difficulty may be restricted to one academic skill or domain (e.g., read-
ing single words, retrieving or  calculating number facts).
Comprehensive assessment is required. Specifi c learning disorder can only be diagnosed
after formal education starts bu t can be diagnosed at any point afterward in children, adoles-
cents, or adults, providing there is evidence of onset during the years of formal schooling (i.e.,
the developmental period). No sing le data source is sufficient fo r a diagnosis of specific learn-
ing disorder. Rather, specific learning disorder is a clinical diagnosis based on a synthesis of
the individual’s medical, develo pmental, educational, and family  history; the history of the
learning difficulty, including it s previous and current manifestat ion; the impact of the diffi-
culty on academic, occupational, or social functioning; previo us or current school reports;
portfolios of work requiring academic skills; curriculum-based assessments; and previous or
current scores from individual standardized test s of academic achievemen t. If an intellectual,
sensory, neurological, or motor disorder is susp ected, then the clinical assessment for specific
learning disorder should also include methods appropriate for these disorders. Thus, compre-
hensive assessment will involve professionals with expertise in specific learning disorder and
psychological/cognitive assessment. Since specific  learning disorder typically persists into
adulthood, reassessment is rarely necessary, un less indicated by marked changes in the learn-
ing difficulties (amelioration or worsenin g) or requested for specific purposes.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Specific learning disorder is frequently but not invariably preceded, in preschool years, by
delays in attention, language, or motor skills that may pers ist and co-occur with specific
learning disorder. An uneven profile of abilities is common , such as above-average abili-
ties in drawing, design, and other visuospatial  abilities, but slow, effortful, and inaccurate
reading and poor reading comprehension and written expression. Individuals with spe-
cific learning disorder typica lly (but not invariably) exhibit poor performance on psycho-
logical tests of cognitive processing. However,  it remains unclear whether these cognitive
abnormalities are the caus e, correlate, or consequence of th e learning difficulties. Also, al-
though cognitive deficits associated with diff iculties learning to read words are well doc-
umented, those associated with other manifestations of specific learning disorder (e.g.,
reading comprehension, arithmetic computat ion, written expression) are underspecified
or unknown. Moreover, individu als with similar behavioral sy mptoms or test scores are
found to have a variety of cognitive deficits, and many of these processing deficits are also
found in other neurodevelopmental disorders (e.g., attention-deficit/hyperactivity disor-
der [ADHD], autistic spectrum  disorder, communication diso rders, developmental coor-
dination disorder). Thus, asses sment of cognitive processing deficits is not required for
diagnostic assessment. Specific le arning disorder is associated  with increased risk for sui-
cidal ideation and suicide attempts in  children, adolescents, and adults.
There are no known biological markers of spec ific learning disorder. As a group, indi-
viduals with the disorder show circumscribe d alterations in cognitive processing and
brain structure and func tion. Genetic differences are also evident at the group level. But
cognitive testing, neuroimaging, or genetic test ing are not useful for diagnosis at this time.
Prevalence
The prevalence of specific learning disorder across the academic domains of reading, writ-
ing, and mathematics is 5%–15% among school-age children across different languages
and cultures. Prevalence in adults is unknown but appear s to be approximately 4%.
Development and Course
Onset, recognition, and diagnosis of specific learning disorder usually occurs during the
elementary school years when children are requir ed to learn to read, sp ell, write, and learn
Specific Learning Disorder 71
mathematics. However, precursors such as la nguage delays or defi cits, difficulties in
rhyming or counting, or difficulties with fine motor skills required  for writing commonly
occur in early childhood before the start of formal schooling. Manifestations may be be-
havioral (e.g., a reluctance to engage in le arning; oppositional beha vior). Specific learning
disorder is lifelong, but the course and clinical expression are variable, in part depending
on the interactions among the task demands of  the environment, the range and severity of
the individual’s learning difficulties, the indi vidual’s learning abilities, comorbidity, and
the available support systems and intervention . Nonetheless, problems with reading flu-
ency and comprehension, spelling, written expr ession, and numeracy sk ills in everyday life
typically persist into adulthood.
Changes in manifestation of symptoms occur with age, so that an individual may have
a persistent or shifting array of learning difficulties across the lifespan.
Examples of symptoms that may be observed among preschool-age children include a lack
of interest in playing games with language s ounds (e.g., repetition, rhyming), and they may
have trouble learning nursery rhymes. Preschool children with sp ecific learning disorder may
frequently use baby talk, mispronounce words,  and have trouble remembering names of let-
ters, numbers, or days of the week. They may fa il to recognize letters in their own names and
have trouble learning to count. Kindergarten-age children with specific learning disorder may
be unable to recognize and write letters, may be unable to write their own names, or may use
invented spelling. They may have trouble brea king down spoken words into syllables (e.g.,
“cowboy” into “cow” and “boy”) and trouble reco gnizing words that rhyme (e.g., cat, bat, hat).
Kindergarten-age children also may have trouble connecting letters with their sounds (e.g., let-
ter b makes the sound /b/) and may be unable  to recognize phonemes (e.g., do not know
which in a set of words [e.g., dog, man, car] starts with the same sound as “cat”).
Specific learning disorder in elementary school–age children typically manifests as
marked difficulty learning letter-sound corres pondence (particularly in English-speaking
children), fluent word decoding, spelling, or ma th facts; reading aloud is slow, inaccurate,
and effortful, and some childr en struggle to understand the magnitude that a spoken or
written number represents. Children in prim ary grades (grades 1–3) may continue to have
problems recognizing and manipulating phon emes, be unable to read common one-sylla-
ble words (such as mat or top), and be un able recognize common irregularly spelled
words (e.g., said, two). They may commit read ing errors that indicate problems in con-
necting sounds and letters (e.g., “big” for “g ot”) and have difficult y sequencing numbers
and letters. Children in grades 1-3 also may have difficulty remembering number facts or
arithmetic procedures for addi ng, subtracting, and so forth, and may complain that read-
ing or arithmetic is hard and avoid doing it. Ch ildren with specific learning disorder in the
middle grades (grades 4–6) may mispronounce or skip parts of long, multisyllable words
(e.g., say “conible” for “convertible,” “aminal” for “animal”) and confuse words that
sound alike (e.g., “tornado” for “volcano”) . They may have trouble remembering dates,
names, and telephone numbers and may have trouble completing homework or tests on
time. Children in the middle grades also may have poor comprehension with or without
slow, effortful, and inaccurate reading, and they may have trouble reading small function
words (e.g., that, the, an, in). They may ha ve very poor spelling and poor written work.
They may get the first part of a word correctly , then guess wildly (e.g., read “clover” as
“clock”), and may express fear of read ing aloud or refuse to read aloud.
By contrast, adolescents may have mastered  word decoding, but reading remains slow
and effortful, and they are likely to show ma rked problems in reading comprehension and
written expression (including poor spelling) and poor master y of math facts or mathemat-
ical problem solving. During adolescence an d into adulthood, indi viduals with specific
learning disorder may continue to make nu merous  spelling mistakes and read single
words and connected text slowly and with mu ch effort, with trou ble pronouncing multi-
syllable words. They may frequently need to reread material to understand or get the main
point and have trouble making inferences fr om written text. Adolescents and adults may
72 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
avoid activities that demand reading or arit hmetic (reading for pl easure, reading instruc-
tions). Adults with specific learning disord er have ongoing spelling problems, slow and
effortful reading, or problems making impo rtant inferences from numerical information
in work-related written documents. They ma y avoid both leisure and work-related activ-
ities that demand reading or writing or use alternative approaches to access print (e.g.,
text-to-speech/speech-to-text softwa re, audiobooks, audiovisual media).
An alternative clinical expression is that of  circumscribed learning difficulties that per-
sist across the lifespan, such as an inability to master the basic sense of number (e.g., to
know which of a pair of number s or dots represents the larger magnitude), or lack of pro-
ficiency in word identification or spelling. Av oidance of or reluctance to engage in activi-
ties requiring academic skills is common in ch ildren, adolescents, and adults. Episodes of
severe anxiety or anxiety disorders, including somatic complaints or panic attacks, are
common across the lifespan and accompany both the circumscribed and the broader ex-
pression of learning difficulties.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Prematurity or very low birth weight increases the risk for specific
learning disorder, as does pr enatal exposure to nicotine.
Genetic and physiological. Specific learning disorder a ppears to aggregate in families,
particularly when affecting reading, mathemat ics, and spelling. The relative risk of spe-
cific learning disorder in reading or mathematics is substantially higher (e.g., 4–8 times
and 5–10 times higher, respectively) in first- degree relatives of individuals with these
learning difficulties compared with those wi thout them. Family hist ory of reading diffi-
culties (dyslexia) and parental literacy skills predict literacy problems or specific learning
disorder in offspring, indicating the combin ed role of genetic and environmental factors.
There is high heritability for both reading ab ility and reading disability in alphabetic and
nonalphabetic languages, including high heritabi lity for most manifestations of learning abil-
ities and disabilities (e.g., heritability estimate  values greater than 0. 6). Covariation between
various manifestations of learning difficulties is high, suggesting that genes related to one
presentation are highly co rrelated with genes related to another manifestation.
Course modifiers. Marked problems with inattentive be havior in preschool years is pre-
dictive of later difficulties in reading and ma thematics (but not necessarily specific learn-
ing disorder) and nonresponse to  effective academic interventions. Delay or disorders in
speech or language, or impaired cognitive processing (e.g., phonological awareness,
working memory, rapid serial naming) in presch ool years, predicts la ter specific learning
disorder in reading and writ ten expression. Comorbidity wi th ADHD is predictive of
worse mental health outcome than that associ ated with specific learning disorder without
ADHD. Systematic, intensive, individualized instruction, using evidence-based interven-
tions, may improve or ameliorate the learning difficulties in some individuals or promote
the use of compensatory strategies in others , thereby mitigating the otherwise poor out-
comes.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Specific learning disorder oc curs across languages, cultures, races, and socioeconomic
conditions but may vary in its manifestation according to the nature of the spoken and
written symbol systems and cultural and educational practices. For example, the cognitive
processing requirements of reading and of wo rking with numbers vary greatly across or-
thographies. In the English language, the observable hallmark clinical symptom of diffi-
culties learning to read is inaccurate and slow reading of single words; in other alphabetic
languages that have more direct mapping be tween sounds and letters (e.g., Spanish, Ger-
man) and in non-alphabetic la nguages (e.g., Chinese, Japanese), the hallmark feature is
Specific Learning Disorder 73
slow but accurate reading. In English-language learners, assessment should include con-
sideration of whether the source of reading difficulties is a limited proficiency with Eng-
lish or a specific learning disorder. Risk fact ors for specific learning  disorder in English-
language learners include a family history of specific learning disorder or language delay
in the native language, as well as learning difficulties in English and failure to catch up
with peers. If there is suspicio n of cultural or language differences (e.g., as in an English-
language learner), the assessment needs to ta ke into account the individual’s language
proficiency in his or her first or native lang uage as well as in the second language (in this
example, English). Also, assessment should co nsider the linguistic and cultural context in
which the individual is living, as well as his or  her educational and learning history in the
original culture and language.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Specific learning disorder is more common in males than in fema les (ratios range from
about 2:1 to 3:1) and cannot be attributed to factors such as ascertainment bias, definitional
or measurement variation, language , race, or socioeconomic status.
Functional Consequences of
Specific Learning Disorder
Specific learning disorder can have negative functional consequences across the lifespan,
including lower academic attainment, higher ra tes of high school dropout, lower rates of
postsecondary education, high levels of psyc hological distress and poorer overall mental
health, higher rates of unemployment and under-employment, and lower incomes. School
dropout and co-occurring depressive symptoms increase the risk for poor mental health
outcomes, including suicidality, whereas high levels of social or emotional support predict
better mental health outcomes.
Differential Diagnosis
Normal variations in academic attainment. Specific learning disorder is distinguished
from normal variations in academic attainment due to external factors (e.g., lack of edu-
cational opportunity, consistently poor instru ction, learning in a second language), be-
cause the learning difficulties persist in the presence of adequate educational opportunity
and exposure to the same instruction as the p eer group, and competency in the language of
instruction, even when it is different  from one’s primary spoken language.
Intellectual disability (intelle ctual developmental disorder). Specific learning disorder
differs from general learning difficulties assoc iated with intellectual  disability, because the
learning difficulties occur in the presence of normal levels of intellectual functioning (i.e.,
IQ score of at least 70 ± 5). If intellectual disa bility is present, specific learning disorder can
be diagnosed only when the learning difficult ies are in excess of those usually associated
with the intellectual disability.
Learning difficulties due to neurological or sensory disorders. Specific learning dis-
order is distinguished from lear ning difficulties due to neurological or sensory disorders
(e.g., pediatric stroke, traumatic brain injury , hearing impairment, vi sion impairment), be-
cause in these cases there are abnormal findings on neurological examination.
Neurocognitive disorders. Specific learning disorder is distinguished from learning
problems associated with neurodegenerative cognitive disorders, because in specific
learning disorder the clinical expression of specific learning difficulties occurs during the
developmental period, and the difficulties do not manifest as a mark ed decline from a for-
mer state.
74 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Specific learning disorder is distinguished from
the poor academic performance associated with ADHD, because in the latter condition the
problems may not necessarily reflect specific difficulties in learning academic skills but
rather may reflect difficulties in performing  those skills. However,  the co-occurrence of
specific learning disorder and ADHD is more fr equent than expected by chance. If criteria
for both disorders are met, both diagnoses can be given.
Psychotic disorders. Specific learning disorder is dist inguished from the academic and
cognitive-processing difficulties associated wi th schizophrenia or psychosis, because with
these disorders there is a decline (often rapid) in these functional domains.
Comorbidity 
Specific learning disorder commonly co-occ urs with neurodevelopmental (e.g., ADHD,
communication disorders, developmental coordi nation disorder, autistic spectrum disor-
der) or other mental disorders (e.g., anxiety disorders, depressive and bipolar disorders).
These comorbidities do not necessarily exclud e the diagnosis specific learning disorder
but may make testing and differential diagnosis more difficult, because each of the co-
occurring disorders independentl y interferes with the executio n of activities of daily liv-
ing, including learning. Thus, clinical judgment  is required to attrib ute such impairment to
learning difficulties. If there is an indication that another diagnosis could account for the
difficulties learning keystone academic skills  described in Criterion A, specific learning
disorder should not be diagnosed. 
Motor Disorders
Developmental Coordination Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 315.4 (F82)
A. The acquisition and execution of coordinated motor skills is substantially below that ex-
pected given the individual’s chronological age and opportunity for skill learning and
use. Difficulties are manifested as clumsi ness (e.g., dropping or bumping into objects)
as well as slowness and inaccuracy of performance of motor skills (e.g., catching an
object, using scissors or cutlery, handwriting, riding a bike, or participating in sports). 
B. The motor skills deficit in Criterion A significantly and persistently interferes with activ-
ities of daily living appropriate to chronological age (e.g., self-care and self-mainte-
nance) and impacts academic/school pr oductivity, prevocational and vocational
activities, leisure, and play.
C. Onset of symptoms is in the early developmental period.
D. The motor skills deficits are not better explained by intellectual disability (intellectual devel-
opmental disorder) or visual impairment and are not attributable to a neurological condi-
tion affecting movement (e.g., cerebral palsy, muscular dystrophy, degenerative disorder).
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of developmental coordination diso rder is made by a clinical synthesis of the
history (developmental and medical), physical ex amination, school or workplace report, and
individual assessment using psychometrically sound and culturally appropriate standardized
tests. The manifestation of impaired skills re quiring motor coordination  (Criterion A) varies
Developmental Coordination Disorder 75
with age. Young children may be delayed in achi eving motor milestones (i.e., sitting, crawling,
walking), although many achieve typical motor milestones. They also may be delayed in de-
veloping skills such as negotiating stairs, peda ling, buttoning shirts, completing puzzles, and
using zippers. Even when the skill is achiev ed, movement executio n may appear awkward,
slow, or less precise than that of  peers. Older children and adults may display slow speed or in-
accuracy with motor aspects of activities such as assembling puzzles, building models, playing
ball games (especially in teams), handwriting, ty ping, driving, or carrying out self-care skills.
Developmental coordination di sorder is diagnosed only if  the impairment in motor
skills significantly interferes with the performanc e of, or participation in, daily activities in
family, social, school, or community life (Criteri on B). Examples of such activities include
getting dressed, eating meals with age-appropriate utensils and without mess, engaging
in physical games with others, using specific t ools in class such as rulers and scissors, and
participating in team exercise activities at sc hool. Not only is ability to perform these ac-
tions impaired, but also marked slowness in execution is common. Handwriting compe-
tence is frequently affected, consequently affe cting legibility and/or speed of written output
and affecting academic achievement (the impact is distinguished from specific learning
difficulty by the emphasis on the motoric comp onent of written output skills). In adults,
everyday skills in education and work, especially those in which speed and accuracy are
required, are affected by coordination problems.
Criterion C states that the onset of sympto ms of developmental coordination disorder
must be in the early developmental period. However, developmental coordination disorder is
typically not diagnosed before age 5 years because there is considerable variation in the age at
acquisition of many motor skills or a lack of st ability of measurement in early childhood (e.g.,
some children catch up) or because other causes of motor delay may not have fully manifested.
Criterion D specifies that the diagnosis of  developmental coordination disorder is
made if the coordination difficulties are not better explained by visual impairment or at-
tributable to a neurological condition. Thus, visual functi on examination and neurological
examination must be included in the diagnost ic evaluation. If intellectual disability (intel-
lectual developmental disorder) is present, the motor difficulties are in excess of those ex-
pected for the mental age; ho wever, no IQ cut-off or disc repancy criterion is specified.
Developmental coordination disorder does no t have discrete subtypes; however, indi-
viduals may be impaired predominantly in gro ss motor skills or in fine motor skills, in-
cluding handwriting skills.
Other terms used to describe developm ental coordination disorder include childhood
dyspraxia,  specific developmental disorder of motor function,  and clumsy child syndrome.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Some children with developmental coordination disorder sh ow additional (usually sup-
pressed) motor activity, such as choreiform  movements of unsupported limbs or mirror
movements. These “overflow” movements are referred to as neurodevelopment al immaturities  or
neurological soft signs  rather than neurological abnormalit ies. In both current literature and
clinical practice, their role in diagnosis is  still unclear, requiring further evaluation.
Prevalence
The prevalence of developmental coordination disorder in children ages 5–11 years is 5%–
6% (in children age 7 years, 1.8% are diagnosed with severe developmental coordination
disorder and 3% with probable developmental coordination disorder). Males are more of-
ten affected than females, with a male:female ratio between 2:1 and 7:1.
Development and Course
The course of developmental coordination disord er is variable but stable at least to 1 year
follow-up. Although there may be improvement in the longer term, problems with coor-
76 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
dinated movements continue th rough adolescence in an esti mated 50%–70% of children.
Onset is in early childhood. Delayed motor mile stones may be the first signs, or the disor-
der is first recognized when the child attempts  tasks such as holding a knife and fork, but-
toning clothes, or playing ball games. In middle childhood, there are difficulties with
motor aspects of assembling puzzles, building  models, playing ball, and handwriting, as
well as with organizing belongings, when mo tor sequencing and co ordination are re-
quired. In early adulthood, there is continuing difficulty in learning new tasks involving
complex/automatic motor skills, including drivin g and using tools. Inability to take notes
and handwrite quickly may affect performance in the workplace. Co-occurrence with
other disorders (see the sectio n “Comorbidity” for this disorder) has an additional impact
on presentation, course, and outcome.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Developmental coordination disorder  is more common following pre-
natal exposure to alcohol and in pr eterm and low-birth-weight children.
Genetic and physiological. Impairments in underlying neurodevelopmental processes—
particularly in visual-motor sk ills, both in visual-motor perception and spatial mentalizing—
have been found and affect the ability to make rapid motoric adjustments as the complexity of
the required movements increases. Cerebellar dysfunction has been proposed, but the neural
basis of developmental coordination disorder remains unclear. Because of the co-occurrence of
developmental coordination disorder with atte ntion-deficit/hyperactiv ity disorder (ADHD),
specific learning disabilities, and autism spectr um disorder, shared genetic effect has been pro-
posed. However, consistent co-occurrence in twins appears only in severe cases.
Course modifiers. Individuals with ADHD and with developmental coordination dis-
order demonstrate more impair ment than individuals with  ADHD without developmen-
tal coordination disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Developmental coordination disorder occurs  across cultures, races, and socioeconomic
conditions. By definition, “acti vities of daily living” implie s cultural differences necessi-
tating consideration of the context in whic h the individual child is living as well as
whether he or she has had appropriate opportun ities to learn and practice such activities. 
Functional Consequences of 
Developmental Coordination Disorder 
Developmental coordination disorder leads to  impaired functional performance in activ-
ities of daily living (Criterion B), and the impairment is increased with co-occurring con-
ditions. Consequences of developmental coordination disorder include reduced
participation in team play and sports; poor self-esteem and sense of self-worth ; emotional
or behavior problems; impair ed academic achievement; p oor physical fitness; and re-
duced physical activity and obesity.
Differential Diagnosis
Motor impairments due to another medical condition. Problems in coordination may
be associated with visual function impairme nt and specific neurological disorders (e.g.,
cerebral palsy, progressive lesions of the cerebellum, neuromuscula r disorders). In such
cases, there are additional findin gs on neurological examination. 
Intellectual disability (intell ectual developmental disorder). If intellectual disability is
present, motor competences may be impaired in accordance with the intellectual disabil-
Stereotypic Movement Disorder 77
ity. However, if the motor difficulties are in excess of what could be  accounted for by the
intellectual disability, and crit eria for developmental coordination disorder are met, de-
velopmental coordination disorder can be diagnosed as well. 
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Individuals with ADHD may fall, bump into
objects, or knock things over. Careful observat ion across different contexts is required to
ascertain if lack of motor competence is at tributable to distract ibility and impulsiveness
rather than to developmental coordination disorder. If criteria for both ADHD and devel-
opmental coordination disorder are met, both diagnoses can be given.
Autism spectrum disorder. Individuals with autism spectrum disorder may be uninter-
ested in participating in task s requiring complex coordination skills, such as ball sports,
which will affect test performance and function but not reflect core motor competence. Co-
occurrence of developmental coordination disorder and autism spectr um disorder is com-
mon. If criteria for both  disorders are met, both diagnoses can be given.
Joint hypermobility syndrome. Individuals with syndrome s causing hyperextensible
joints (found on ph ysical examination; often with a complaint of pain) may present with
symptoms similar to those of deve lopmental coordination disorder.
Comorbidity
Disorders that commonly co-occur with deve lopmental coordination  disorder include
speech and language disorder; specific learning disorder (especially reading and writing);
problems of inattention, incl uding ADHD (the most frequent coexisting condition, with
about 50% co-occurrence); autism spectrum disord er; disruptive and emotional behavior
problems; and joint hypermobility syndrome. Different clusters of co-occurrence may be
present (e.g., a cluster with severe reading di sorders, fine motor problems, and handwriting
problems; another cluster with impaired movement control and motor planning). Presence
of other disorders does not exclude develo pmental coordination disorder but may make
testing more difficult and may independently interfere with th e execution of activities of
daily living, thus requiring examiner judgment in ascribing impairment to motor skills. 
Stereotypic Movement Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 307.3 (F98.4)
A. Repetitive, seemingly driven, and apparently purposeless motor behavior (e.g., hand
shaking or waving, body rocking, head banging, self-biting, hitting own body).
B. The repetitive motor behavior interferes wit h social, academic, or other activities and
may result in self-injury.
C. Onset is in the early developmental period.
D. The repetitive motor behavior is not attributable to the physiological effects of a sub-
stance or neurological condition and is no t better explained by another neurodevel-
opmental or mental disorder (e.g., trichotillomania [hair-pulling disorder], obsessive-
compulsive disorder).
Specify if:
With self-injurious behavior (or behavior that would result in an injury if preventive
measures were not used)
Without self-injurious behavior
Specify if:
Associated with a known medical or genetic condition, neurodevelopmental dis-
order, or environmental factor  (e.g., Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, intellectual disability
[intellectual developmental disorder], intrauterine alcohol exposure)
78 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Coding note:  Use additional code to identify the associated medical or genetic
condition, or neurodevelopmental disorder.
Specify current severity:
Mild:  Symptoms are easily suppressed by sensory stimulus or distraction.
Moderate: Symptoms require explicit protective measures and behavioral modification.
Severe:  Continuous monitoring and protective m easures are required to prevent seri-
ous injury.
Recording Procedures
For stereotypic movement diso rder that is associated with a known medical or genetic
condition, neurodevelopmental disorder, or  environmental factor, record stereotypic
movement disorder associated with (name of condition, disorder, or factor) (e.g., stereo-
typic movement disorder associat ed with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome).
Specifiers
The severity of non-self-injurious stereotypi c movements ranges from  mild presentations
that are easily suppressed by a sensory stimul us or distraction to continuous movements
that markedly interfere with all activities of da ily living. Self-injurious  behaviors range in se-
verity along various dimensions, including the frequency, impact on adaptive functioning,
and severity of bodily injury (from mild bruising or erythema from hitting hand against
body, to lacerations or amputa tion of digits, to retinal detachment from head banging).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of stereotypic movement disorder is repetitive, seemingly driven,
and apparently purposeless motor behavior (Criterion A). These behaviors are often
rhythmical movements of the head, hands, or body without obvious adaptive function.
The movements may or may not respond to efforts to stop them. Among typically devel-
oping children, the repetitive movements may be stopped when attention is directed to
them or when the child is distracted from performing them. Among children with neuro-
developmental disorders, the behaviors are typically less responsive to such efforts. In
other cases, the individual demonstrates self-restraining beha viors (e.g., sitting on hands,
wrapping arms in clothing, finding a protective device).
The repertoire of behaviors is variable; each individual presents with his or her own in-
dividually patterned, “signat ure” behavior. Examples of no n-self-injurious stereotypic
movements include, but are not limited to, bo dy rocking, bilateral flapping or rotating
hand movements, flicking or fl uttering fingers in front of the face, arm waving or flapping,
and head nodding. Stereotyped self-injurious behaviors include,  but are not limited to, re-
petitive head banging, face slapping, eye poki ng, and biting of hands, lips, or other body
parts. Eye poking is particularly concerning; it occurs more freq uently among children
with visual impairment. Multiple movements may be combined (e.g., cocking the head,
rocking the torso, waving a small string  repetitively in front of the face).
Stereotypic movements may oc cur many times during a da y, lasting a few seconds to
several minutes or longer. Frequency can vary  from many occurrences in a single day to
several weeks elapsing between episodes. The behaviors vary in context, occurring when
the individual is engrossed in other activities , when excited, stressed, fatigued, or bored.
Criterion A requires that the movements be  “apparently” purposeless. However, some
functions may be served by the movements. For example, stereotypic movements might
reduce anxiety in response to external stressors.
Criterion B states that the stereotypic mo vements interfere with social, academic, or
other activities and, in some children, may resu lt in self-injury (or would if protective mea-
sures were not used). If self-injury is present,  it should be coded using the specifier. Onset
Stereotypic Movement Disorder 79
of stereotypic movements is in the early deve lopmental period (Criterion C). Criterion D
states that the repetitive, stereotyped behavior  in stereotypic movement disorder is not at-
tributable to the physiological effects of a su bstance or neurological  condition and is not
better explained by another ne urodevelopmental or mental disorder. The presence of
stereotypic movements may indicate an unde tected neurodevelopmental problem, espe-
cially in children ages 1–3 years.
Prevalence 
Simple stereotypic movements (e.g., rocking) ar e common in young typically developing chil-
dren. Complex stereoty pic movements are much less common (occurring in approximately
3%–4%). Between 4% and 16% of individuals with intellectual disability (intellectual develop-
mental disorder) engage in stereotypy and self-injury. The risk is greater in individuals with
severe intellectual disability. Among individual s with intellectual disability living in res-
idential facilities, 10%–15% may have stereo typic movement disord er with self-injury.
Development and Course 
Stereotypic movements typically begin within the first 3 years of life. Simple stereotypic move-
ments are common in infancy and may be involve d in acquisition of motor mastery. In chil-
dren who develop complex motor stereotypies, approximately 80% exhibit symptoms before
24 months of age, 12% between 24  and 35 months, and 8% at 36 months or older. In most typ-
ically developing children, these movements resolve over time or can be suppressed. Onset of
complex motor stereotypies may be in infancy or later in the develo pmental period. Among
individuals with intellectual disability, the ster eotyped, self-injurious behaviors may persist
for years, even though the typography or pattern of self-injury may change.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Social isolation is a risk factor for self-stimulation that may progress to
stereotypic movements with repetitive self-inj ury. Environmental stress may also trigger
stereotypic behavior. Fear may alter physiological state, resulting in increased frequency
of stereotypic behaviors.
Genetic and physiological. Lower cognitive functioning is link ed to greater risk for stereo-
typic behaviors and poorer response to interv entions. Stereotypic movements are more fre-
quent among individuals with moderate-to-se vere/profound intellectual disability, who by
virtue of a particular syndrome (e.g., Rett syndrome) or environmental factor (e.g., an environ-
ment with relatively insufficient stimulation) se em to be at higher risk for stereotypies. Repet-
itive self-injurious behavior ma y be a behavioral phenotype in  neurogenetic syndromes. For
example, in Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, there are bo th stereotypic dystonic  movements and self-
mutilation of fingers, lip biti ng, and other forms of self-injury unless the individual is re-
strained, and in Rett syndrome and Cornelia de  Lange syndrome, self-i njury may result from
the hand-to-mouth st ereotypies. Stereotypic behaviors may result from a painful medical con-
dition (e.g., middle ear infection, de ntal problems, gastro esophageal reflux).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Stereotypic movement disorder, wi th or without self-injury, occurs in all races and cultures.
Cultural attitudes toward unusual behaviors may result in delayed diagnosis. Overall cultural
tolerance and attitudes toward stereotypic movement vary and mu st be considered.
Differential Diagnosis
Normal development. Simple stereotypic movements ar e common in infancy and early
childhood. Rocking may occur in the transition from sleep to awake, a behavior that usu-
80 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
ally resolves with age. Complex stereotypi es are less common in typically developing
children and can usually be suppressed by dist raction or sensory stimulation. The indi-
vidual’s daily routine is rarely affected, and the movements generally do not cause the
child distress. The diagno sis would not be appropriat e in these circumstances.
Autism spectrum disorder. Stereotypic movements may be a presenting symptom of
autism spectrum disorder and should be con sidered when repetitive movements and be-
haviors are being evaluated. Deficits of soci al communication and re ciprocity manifesting
in autism spectrum disorder are generally ab sent in stereotypic mo vement disorder, and
thus social interaction, social communication , and rigid repetitive behaviors and interests
are distinguishing features. Wh en autism spectrum disorder is present, stereotypic move-
ment disorder is diagnosed only when there is self-injury or when the stereotypic behav-
iors are sufficiently severe to  become a focus of treatment.
Tic disorders. Typically, stereotypies have an earlier age at onset (before 3 years) than
do tics, which have a mean age at onset of 5–7 years. They are consistent and fixed in their
pattern or topography compared with tics, which are variable in their presentation. Ste-
reotypies may involve arms, hands, or the entire body, while tics commonly involve eyes,
face, head, and shoulders. Stereotypies are more fixed, rhythmic, and prolonged in dura-
tion than tics, which, generally, are brief, ra pid, random, and fluctuating. Tics and stereo-
typic movements are both reduced by distraction.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. Stereotypic movement disorder is dis-
tinguished from obsessive-co mpulsive disorder (OCD) by the absence of obsessions, as
well as by the nature of the repetitive behaviors. In OCD the individual feels driven to per-
form repetitive behaviors in response to an ob session or according to rules that must be ap-
plied rigidly, whereas in stereotypic movement disorder the behaviors are seemingly
driven but apparently purposeless. Trichot illomania (hair-pulling disorder) and excoria-
tion (skin-picking) disorder are characterize d by body-focused repetitive behaviors (i.e.,
hair pulling and skin picking) that may be seemingly driven but th at are not apparently
purposeless, and that may not be patterned or rhythmical. Furthermore, onset in tricho-
tillomania and excoriation disord er is not typically in the early developmental period, but
rather around puberty or later.
Other neurological and medical conditions. The diagnosis of stereotypic movements
requires the exclusion of habits, mannerisms, pa roxysmal dyskinesias, and benign he-
reditary chorea. A neurological history and examination are required to assess features
suggestive of other disorders, such as myoclo nus, dystonia, tics, and chorea. Involuntary
movements associated with a neurological co ndition may be distinguished by their signs
and symptoms. For example, repetitive, stereotypic movements in tardive dyskinesia can
be distinguished by a history of chronic neuroleptic use and characteristic oral or facial
dyskinesia or irregular trunk or limb movements. These type s of movements do not result
in self-injury. A diagnosis of stereotypic mo vement disorder is not appropriate for repet-
itive skin picking or scratching associated with amphetamine intoxi cation or abuse (e.g.,
patients are diagnosed with substance/medication-induced obsessi ve-compulsive and re-
lated disorder) and repetitive choreoathetoid  movements associated with other neurolog-
ical disorders.
Comorbidity
Stereotypic movement d isorder may occur as a primary diagnosis or secondary to another
disorder. For example, stereotypies are a common manifestation of a variety of neuro-
genetic disorders, such as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, Rett syndrome, fragile X syndrome,
Cornelia de Lange syndrome, and Smith-Magenis syndrome. When stereotypic move-
ment disorder co-occurs with another me dical condition, both should be coded.
Tic Disorders 81
Tic Disorders
Diagnostic Criteria  
Note:  A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movement or vocalization.
Tourette’s Disorder 307.23 (F95.2)
A. Both multiple motor and one or more vocal tics have been present at some time during
the illness, although not necessarily concurrently.
B. The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for more than 1 year since
first tic onset.
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., co-
caine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral encephalitis).
Persistent (Chronic) Motor or Vocal Tic Disorder 307.22 (F95.1)
A. Single or multiple motor or vocal tics have been present during the illness, but not both
motor and vocal.
B. The tics may wax and wane in frequency but have persisted for more than 1 year since
first tic onset.
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., co-
caine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral encephalitis).
E. Criteria have never been met for Tourette’s disorder.
Specify if:
With motor tics only
With vocal tics only
Provisional Tic Disorder 307.21 (F95.0)
A. Single or multiple motor and/or vocal tics.
B. The tics have been present for less than 1 year since first tic onset.
C. Onset is before age 18 years.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., co-
caine) or another medical condition (e.g., Huntington’s disease, postviral encephalitis).
E. Criteria have never been met for Tourette’s disorder or persistent (chronic) motor or
vocal tic disorder.
Specifiers 
The “motor tics only” or “vocal tics only” spec ifier is only required for persistent (chronic)
motor or vocal tic disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Tic disorders comprise four diagnostic categori es: Tourette’s disorder, persistent (chronic)
motor or vocal tic disorder, pr ovisional tic disorder, and the other specified and unspecified
tic disorders. Diagnosis for any tic disorder is  based on the presence of motor and/or vocal
tics (Criterion A), dura tion of tic symptoms (C riterion B), age at onse t (Criterion C), and ab-
sence of any known cause such as another medical condition or substance use (Criterion D).
The tic disorders are hierarchical in order (i .e., Tourette’s disorder, followed by persistent
[chronic] motor or vocal tic disorder, followed by provisional tic disorder, followed by the
82 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
other specified and unspecified tic disorders), such that once a tic disorder at one level of the
hierarchy is diagnosed, a lower hierarchy diagnosis cannot be made (Criterion E).
Tics are sudden, rapid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movements or vocalizations. An
individual may have various tic symptoms over  time, but at any point in time, the tic rep-
ertoire recurs in a characteristic fashion. Although tics can include almost any muscle group
or vocalization, certain tic symptoms, such as  eye blinking or throat clearing, are common
across patient populations. Tics are generall y experienced as involun tary but can be vol-
untarily suppressed for varying lengths of time.
Tics can be either simple or complex. Simple motor tics  are of short duration (i.e., milli-
seconds) and can include eye blinking, should er shrugging, and extension of the extrem-
ities. Simple vocal tics include throat clea ring, sniffing, and grunting often caused by
contraction of the diaphragm or  muscles of the oropharynx. Complex motor tics  are of lon-
ger duration (i.e., seconds) and often include a combination of simple tics such as simul-
taneous head turning and shoulder shrugging . Complex tics can appear purposeful, such
as a tic-like sexual or obscene gesture ( copropraxia ) or a tic-like imitation of someone else’s
movements ( echopraxia). Similarly, complex vocal tics include repeating one’s own sounds
or words ( palilalia ), repeating the last-heard word or phrase ( echolalia ), or uttering socially
unacceptable words, including obscenities,  or ethnic, racial, or religious slurs ( coprolalia ).
Importantly, coprolalia is an abrupt, sharp ba rk or grunt utterance and lacks the prosody
of similar inappropriate speech observed in human interactions.
The presence of motor and/or vocal tics varies across the four tic disorders (Criterion
A). For Tourette’s disorder, both motor and vo cal tics must be present, whereas for per-
sistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder, on ly motor or only vocal tics are present. For
provisional tic disorder, motor and/or vocal tics may be presen t. For other specified or un-
specified tic disorders, the movement disorder symptoms are best characterized as tics but
are atypical in presentation or age at onset, or have a known etiology.
The 1-year minimum duration criterion (Cri terion B) assures that individuals diag-
nosed with either Tourette’s disorder or pe rsistent (chronic) moto r or vocal tic disorder
have had persistent symptoms. Tics wax and wa ne in severity, and some individuals may
have tic-free periods of weeks to months; ho wever, an individual who has had tic symp-
toms of greater than 1 year’s duration since fi rst tic onset would be considered to have per-
sistent symptoms regardless of duration of ti c-free periods. For an individual with motor
and/or vocal tics of less than 1 year since firs t tic onset, a provisional tic disorder diagnosis
can be considered. There is no duration specif ication for other specif ied and unspecified tic
disorders. The onset of tics mu st occur prior to age 18 year s (Criterion C). Tic disorders
typically begin in the prepubertal period, with  an average age at onset between 4 and 6
years, and with the incidence of new-onset tic disorders decreasing in the teen years. New
onset of tic symptoms in adulthood is exceedin gly rare and is often associated with expo-
sures to drugs (e.g., excessive cocaine use) or is a result of a central nervous system insult
(e.g., postviral encephalitis). Although tic onse t is uncommon in teenagers and adults, it is
not uncommon for adolescents an d adults to present for an initial diagnostic assessment
and, when carefully evaluated, provide a histor y of milder symptoms dating back to child-
hood. New-onset abnormal move ments suggestive of tics out side of the us ual age range
should result in evaluation for other move ment disorders or for specific etiologies.
Tic symptoms cannot be  attributable to the physiologica l effects of a substance or an-
other medical condition (Criterion D). When there is strong eviden ce from the history,
physical examination, and/or laboratory resu lts to suggest a plausible, proximal, and
probable cause for a tic disorder, a diagnosis of other specified tic disorder should be used.
Having previously met diagnostic criteria fo r Tourette’s disorder negates a possible di-
agnosis of persistent (chronic) motor or vocal ti c disorder (Criterion E). Similarly, a previ-
ous diagnosis of persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder negates a diagnosis of
provisional tic disorder or ot her specified or unspecified tic disorder (Criterion E).
Tic Disorders 83
Prevalence
Tics are common in childhood but transient in most cases. The estimated prevalence of
Tourette’s disorder ranges from 3 to 8 per 1,000 in school-age children. Males are more
commonly affected than females, with the rati o varying from 2:1 to 4:1. A national survey
in the United States estimated 3 per 1,000 for the prevalence of clinically identified cases.
The frequency of identified cases was lower among African Americans and Hispanic
Americans, which may be related to differences in access to care.
Development and Course
Onset of tics is typically between ages 4 and 6 years. Peak severity occurs between ages 10
and 12 years, with a decline in severity during  adolescence. Many adults with tic disorders
experience diminished sympto ms. A small percentage of in dividuals will have persis-
tently severe or worsening symptoms in adulthood.
Tic symptoms manifest similarly in all age groups and across the lifespan. Tics wax and
wane in severity and change in affected muscle groups an d vocalizations over time. As
children get older, they begin to report th eir tics being associated with a premonitory
urge—a somatic sensation that precedes the tic—and a feeling of tension reduction follow-
ing the expression of the tic. Tics associated with a premonitory urge may be experienced
as not completely “involuntary” in that the ur ge and the tic can be resisted. An individual
may also feel the need to perform a tic in a specific way or repeat it until he or she achieves
the feeling that the tic has been done “just right.”
The vulnerability toward developing co-occurring conditions changes as individuals
pass through the age of risk for various co-o ccurring conditions. For example, prepubertal
children with tic disorders are more likely to experience attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), obsessive-co mpulsive disorder (OCD), and separation anxiety disorder
than are teenagers and adults, who are more li kely to experience the new onset of major
depressive disorder, substance use disorder, or bipolar disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Tics are worsened by anxiety, excitement, and exhaustion and are better
during calm, focused activities. Individuals ma y have fewer tics when engaged in schoolwork
or tasks at work than when relaxing at home after school or in the evening. Stressful/exciting
events (e.g., taking a test, participating in exciting activities) often make tics worse. 
Environmental. Observing a gesture or sound in another person may result in an indi-
vidual with a tic disorder making a simila r gesture or sound, which may be incorrectly
perceived by others as purposeful. This can be a particular problem when the individual is
interacting with authority figures (e .g., teachers, supe rvisors, police).
Genetic and physiological. Genetic and environmental factors influence tic symptom
expression and severity. Important risk allele s for Tourette’s disorder and rare genetic
variants in families with tic disorders have  been identified. Obstetrical complications,
older paternal age, lower birth weight, and maternal smoking during pregnancy are as-
sociated with worse tic severity.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Tic disorders do not appear to vary in clinical  characteristics, course , or etiology by race,
ethnicity, and culture. However, race, ethnici ty, and culture may impa ct how tic disorders
are perceived and managed in the family an d community, as well as influencing patterns
of help seeking, and choices of treatment.
84 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males are more commonly affected than females,  but there are no gender differences in the
kinds of tics, age at onset, or course. Wome n with persistent tic disorders may be more
likely to experience anxiety and depression.
Functional Consequenc es of Tic Disorders
Many individuals with mild to moderate tic se verity experience no distress or impairment
in functioning and may even be unaware of their tics. Individuals with more severe symp-
toms generally have more impairment in daily living, but ev en individuals with moderate
or even severe tic disorders may function we ll. The presence of a co-occurring condition,
such as ADHD or OCD, can have greater impa ct on functioning. Less commonly, tics dis-
rupt functioning in daily activities and result in social isolation, interpersonal conflict,
peer victimization, inab ility to work or to go to school, and lower quality of life. The indi-
vidual also may experience substantial psycho logical distress. Rare complications of Tou-
rette’s disorder include physical injury, such as  eye injury (from hitting oneself in the face),
and orthopedic and neurological injury (e.g., disc disease related to forceful head and neck
movements).
Differential Diagnosis
Abnormal movements that may accompany other medical conditions and stereotypic
movement disorder. Motor stereotypies  are defined as involuntary rhythmic, repetitive,
predictable movements that appe ar purposeful but serve no obvious adaptive function or
purpose and stop with distraction. Examples  include repetitive hand waving/rotating,
arm flapping, and finger wiggling. Motor stereo typies can be differentiated from tics based
on the former’s earlier age at onset (younger than 3 years), prolonged duration (seconds to
minutes), constant repetitive fixed form and location, exacer bation when engrossed in ac-
tivities, lack of a premonitory urge, and ce ssation with distraction (e.g., name called or
touched). Chorea  represents rapid, random, continua l, abrupt, irregular, unpredictable,
nonstereotyped actions that are usually bilatera l and affect all parts of the body (i.e., face,
trunk, and limbs). The timing, direction, and dist ribution of movements vary from mo-
ment to moment, and movements usually worsen during attempted voluntary action. Dys-
tonia  is the simultaneous sustained contracture of both agonist and antagonist muscles,
resulting in a distorted posture or movement of parts of the bo dy. Dystonic postures are of-
ten triggered by attempts at voluntary movements and are not seen during sleep.
Substance-induced and paroxysmal dyskinesias. Paroxysmal dyskinesias usually oc-
cur as dystonic or choreoathetoid movement s that are precipitated by voluntary move-
ment or exertion and less commonly arise from normal background activity.
Myoclonus. Myoclonus is characterized by a sudden unidirectional movement that is
often nonrhythmic. It may be worsened by movement and occur du ring sleep. Myoclonus
is differentiated from tics by its rapidity, la ck of suppressibility, and absence of a premon-
itory urge.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. Differentiating obsessive-compulsive
behaviors from tics may be difficult. Clues fa voring an obsessive-compulsive behavior in-
clude a cognitive-based drive (e.g., fear of co ntamination) and the n eed to perform the ac-
tion in a particular fashion a certain number of  times, equally on both sides of the body, or
until a “just right” feeling is achieved. Impulse-control proble ms and other repetitive be-
haviors, including persistent hair pulling, skin  picking, and nail biting, appear more goal
directed and complex than tics.
Other Specified Tic Disorder 85
Comorbidity
Many medical and psychiatric conditions have been described as co-occurring with tic disor-
ders, with ADHD and obsessive-compulsive and related disorders be ing particularly com-
mon. The obsessive-compulsive symptoms observed  in tic disorder tend to be characterized
by more aggressive symmetry and order symptoms and poorer response to pharmacotherapy
with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Children with ADHD ma y demonstrate disrup-
tive behavior, social immaturi ty, and learning difficulties th at may interfere with academic
progress and interpersonal relationships and lead to greater impairment than that caused by a
tic disorder. Individuals with tic disorders can also have other movement disorders and other
mental disorders, such as depressive,  bipolar, or substance use disorders.
Other Specified Tic Disorder
307.20 (F95.8)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a tic disorder
that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other im-
portant areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for a tic disorder
or any of the disorders in the neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The other
specified tic disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to com-
municate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for a tic disor-
der or any specific neurodevelopmental disorder. This is done by recording “other specified
tic disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “with onset after age 18 years”). 
Unspecified Tic Disorder
307.20 (F95.9)
This category applies to presentations in whic h symptoms characteristic of a tic disorder
that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other im-
portant areas of functioning predominate but do not  meet the full criteria for a tic disorder
or for any of the disorders in the neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The un-
specified tic disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to
specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a tic disorder or for a specific neurode-
velopmental disorder, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information
to make a more specific diagnosis.
86 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Other Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Other Specified Neurodevelopmental Disorder
315.8 (F88)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a neurodevel-
opmental disorder that cause impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the
neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic clas s. The other specified neurodevelopmental
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the
specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific neurode-
velopmental disorder. This is done by recording “other specified neurodevelopmental dis-
order” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “neurodevelopmental disorder associated with
prenatal alcohol exposure”).
An example of a presentation that can be specified using the “other specified” desig-
nation is the following:
Neurodevelopmental disord er associated with pren atal alcohol exposure:  Neu-
rodevelopmental disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure is characterized
by a range of developmental disabilities following exposure to alcohol in utero.
Unspecified Neurodevelopmental Disorder
315.9 (F89)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a neurodevel-
opmental disorder that cause impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the
neurodevelopmental disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified neurodevelopmental dis-
order category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not  to specify the reason
that the criteria are not met for a specific neurodevelopmental disorder, and includes pre-
sentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis
(e.g., in emergency room settings). 