591Neurocognitive
 Disorders
The neurocognitive disorders  (NCDs) (referred to in  DSM-IV as “Dementia,
Delirium, Amnestic, and Other Cognitive Di sorders”) begin with delirium, followed by
the syndromes of major NCD, mild NCD, an d their etiological su btypes. The major or
mild NCD subtypes are NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease; vascular NCD; NCD with Lewy
bodies; NCD due to Parkinso n’s disease; frontotemporal NCD; NCD due to traumatic
brain injury; NCD due to HIV infection; su bstance/medication-induced NCD; NCD due
to Huntington’s disease; NC D due to prion disease; NCD du e to another medical condi-
tion; NCD due to multiple etiologies; and unspecified NCD. The NCD category encom-
passes the group of disorders in which the primar y clinical deficit is in cognitive function,
and that are acquired rather than developmental. Although cognitive deficits are present
in many if not all mental disorders (e.g., schizophrenia, bipolar diso rders), only disorders
whose core features are cognitive are includ ed in the NCD category. The NCDs are those
in which impaired cognition has not been present since birth or very early life, and thus
represents a decline from a previou sly attained level of functioning.
The NCDs are unique among DSM-5 categories in that these are syndromes for which
the underlying pathology, and frequently the etiology as well, can potentially be deter-
mined. The various underlying disease entities  have all been the subject of extensive re-
search, clinical experience, and expert consen sus on diagnostic crit eria. The DSM-5 criteria
for these disorders have  been developed in close consultation with the expert groups for
each of the disease entities and align as closely as possible with the current consensus cri-
teria for each of them. The potential utility of  biomarkers is also discussed in relation to
diagnosis. Dementia is subsumed under the newly named entity major neurocognitive dis-
order , although the term dementia  is not precluded from use in the etiological subtypes in
which that term is standard. Furthermore, DSM-5 recognizes a less severe level of cogni-
tive impairment, mild neurocognitive disorder,  which can also be a focus of care, and which
in DSM-IV was subsumed under “Cognitive Disorder Not Otherwise Specified.” Diagnos-
tic criteria are provided for both these synd romic entities, followed by diagnostic criteria
for the different etiological subtypes. Several of the NCDs frequently coexist with one an-
other, and their relationships may be multip ly characterized under different chapter sub-
headings, including “Differential Diagnosis” (e.g., NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease vs.
vascular NCD), “Risk and Prognostic Factors”  (e.g., vascular path ology increasing the
clinical expression of Alzheimer’s disease), and/or “Comorbidity” (e.g., mixed Alzhei-
mer’s disease–vascular pathology). 
The term dementia  is retained in DSM-5 for contin uity and may be used in settings
where physicians and patients are accustomed to this term. Although dementia is the cus-
tomary term for disorders like the degenerative  dementias that usually affect older adults,
the term neurocognitive disorder  is widely used and often preferred for conditions affect-
ing younger individuals, such as impairment secondary to traumatic brain injury or HIV
infection. Furthermore, the major NCD definition is some what broader than the term
dementia,  in that individuals with substantial decline in a single domain can receive this di-
agnosis, most notably the DSM-IV category of “Amnestic Disorder,” which would now be
diagnosed as major NCD due to another medical condition and for which the term demen-
tia would not be used.
592 Neurocognitive Disorders
Neurocognitive Domains
The criteria for the various NCDs are all base d on defined cognitive domains. Table 1 pro-
vides for each of the key domains a working definition, examples of  symptoms or obser-
vations regarding impairments in everyday activities, and examples of assessments. The
domains thus defined, along with guidelines  for clinical thresholds, form the basis on
which the NCDs, their levels, and their subtypes may be diagnosed.
Neurocognitive Disorders 593TABLE 1 Neurocognitive domains
Cognitive domain Examples of symptoms or  observations Examples of assessments 
Complex attention 
(sustained attention, 
divided attention, 
selective attention, 
processing speed)Major:  Has increased difficulty in environments with multiple 
stimuli (TV, radio, conversation); is easily distracted by compet-
ing events in the environment. Is unable to attend unless input is 
restricted and simplified. Has difficulty holding new information 
in mind, such as recalling phone numbers or addresses just given, 
or reporting what was just said. Is unable to perform mental cal-
culations. All thinking takes longer than usual, and components 
to be processed must be simplified to one or a few.
Mild:  Normal tasks take longer than previously. Begins to find 
errors in routine task s; finds work needs more double-checking 
than previously. Thinking is ea sier when not competing with 
other things (radio, TV, other conversations, cell phone, driving).Sustained attention:  Maintenance of attention over time (e.g., pressing 
a button every time a tone is heard, and over a period of time). 
Selective attention:  Maintenance of attention despite competing stim-
uli and/or distractors: hearing nu mbers and letters read and asked 
to count only letters.
Divided attention:  Attending to two tasks within the same time 
period: rapidly tapping while lear ning a story being read. Process-
ing speed can be quantified on any task by timing it (e.g., time to 
put together a design of blocks; time to match symbols with num-
bers; speed in responding, such as counting speed or serial 3 
speed). 
Executive function 
(planning, decision 
making, working 
memory, respond-
ing to feedback/
error correction, 
overriding habits/
inhibition, mental 
flexibility)Major:  Abandons complex projects. Needs to focus on one task 
at a time. Needs to rely on othe rs to plan instrumental activi-
ties of daily living or make decisions. 
Mild:  Increased effort required to complete multistage projects. 
Has increased difficulty multitasking or difficulty resuming a 
task interrupted by a visitor or phone call. May complain of 
increased fatigue from the extra effort required to organize, 
plan, and make decisions. May repo rt that large social gather-
ings are more taxing or less enjoyable because of increased 
effort required to follow shifting conversations.Planning:  Ability to find the exit to a maze; interpret a sequential pic-
ture or object arrangement.
Decision making:  Performance of tasks that assess process of deciding 
in the face of competing alternat ives (e.g., simulated gambling).
Working memory:  Ability to hold information for a brief period and to 
manipulate it (e.g., adding up a lis t of numbers or repeating a series 
of numbers or words backward).
Feedback/error utilization:  Ability to benefit from feedback to infer the 
rules for solving a problem.
Overriding habits/inhibition:  Ability to choose a more complex and 
effortful solution to be correct (e.g., looking away from the direc-
tion indicated by an arrow; naming the color of a word’s font rather 
than naming the word).
Mental/cognitive flexibility:  Ability to shift between two concepts, 
tasks, or response rules (e.g., from  number to letter, from verbal to 
key-press response, from adding numbers to ordering numbers, 
from ordering objects by si ze to ordering by color).
594 Neurocognitive DisordersLearning and mem-
ory (immediate 
memory, recent 
memory [including 
free recall, cued 
recall, and recogni-
tion memory], 
very-long-term 
memory [semantic; 
autobiographical], 
implicit learning) Major:  Repeats self in conversation, often within the same con-
versation. Cannot keep track of short list of items when shop-
ping or of plans for the day. Requires frequent reminders to 
orient to task at hand.
Mild:  Has difficulty recalling recent  events, and relies increas-
ingly on list making or calendar. Needs occasional reminders 
or re-reading to keep track of characters in a movie or novel. 
Occasionally may repeat self over a few weeks to the same per-
son. Loses track of whether bills have already been paid.
Note:  Except in severe forms of major neurocognitive disorder, 
semantic, autobiographical, an d implicit memory are rela-
tively preserved, compar ed with recent memory. Immediate memory span: Ability to repeat a list of words or digits. 
Note:  Immediate memory sometimes subsumed under “working 
memory” (see “Executive Function”).
Recent memory:  Assesses the process of encoding new information 
(e.g., word lists, a short story, or diagrams). The aspects of recent 
memory that can be tested include 1) free recall (the person is asked 
to recall as many words, diagrams, or elements of a story as possi-
ble); 2) cued recall (examiner aids recall by providing semantic cues 
such as “List all the food items on the list” or “Name all of the chil-
dren from the story”); and 3) re cognition memory (examiner asks 
about specific items—e.g., “Was ’apple’ on the list?”  or “Did you 
see this diagram or figure?”). Othe r aspects of memory that can be 
assessed include semantic memory (memory for facts), autobio-
graphical memory (memory for pers onal events or people), and 
implicit (procedural) learning (u nconscious learning of skills).
Language (expres-
sive language 
[including nam-
ing, word finding, 
fluency, and gram-
mar, and syntax] 
and receptive 
language)Major:  Has significant difficulties with expressive or receptive 
language. Often uses general-use phrases such as “that thing” 
and “you know what I mean,” and prefers general pronouns 
rather than names. With seve re impairment, may not even 
recall names of closer friends and family. Idiosyncratic word 
usage, grammatical errors, and spontaneity of output and 
economy of utterances occur. Stereotypy of speech occurs; 
echolalia and automatic speec h typically precede mutism.
Mild:  Has noticeable word-finding difficulty. May substitute 
general for specific terms. May avoid use of specific names of 
acquaintances. Grammatical errors involve subtle omission or 
incorrect use of articles, prepos itions, auxiliary verbs, etc. Expressive language:  Confrontational naming (identification of objects 
or pictures); fluency (e.g., name  as many items as possible in a 
semantic [e.g., animals] or phonemic [e.g., words starting with “f”] 
category in 1 minute).
Grammar and syntax  (e.g., omission or incorrect use of articles, prep-
ositions, auxiliary verbs): Errors observed during naming and flu-
ency tests are compared with norm s to assess frequency of errors 
and compare with normal slips of the tongue.
Receptive language:  Comprehension (word definition and object-
pointing tasks involving animate and inanimate stimuli): perfor-
mance of actions/activities according to verbal command.TABLE 1 Neurocognitive domains (continued)
Cognitive domain Examples of symptoms or  observations Examples of assessments 
Neurocognitive Disorders 595Perceptual-motor 
(includes abilities 
subsumed under 
the terms visual 
perception,  visuo-
constructional,  
perceptual-motor,  
praxis,  and gnosis ) Major:  Has significant difficulties with previously familiar activ-
ities (using tools, driving motor vehicle), navigating in familiar 
environments; is often more confused at dusk, when shadows 
and lowering levels of light change perceptions. 
Mild:  May need to rely more on maps or others for directions. 
Uses notes and follows others to get to a new place. May find 
self lost or turned around when not concentrating on task. Is 
less precise in parking. Needs to  expend greater effort for spa-
tial tasks such as carpentry, assembly, sewing, or knitting.Visual perception: Line bisection tasks can be used to detect basic 
visual defect or attentional neglect. Motor-free perceptual tasks 
(including facial recognition) require the identification and/or 
matching of figures—best when task s cannot be verbally mediated 
(e.g., figures are not objects); some require the decision of whether 
a figure can be “real” or no t based on dimensionality.  
Visuoconstructional:  Assembly of items requiring hand-eye coordina-
tion, such as drawing, copying, and block assembly. 
Perceptual-motor:  Integrating perception with purposeful movement 
(e.g., inserting blocks into a form board without visual cues; rap-
idly inserting pegs into a slotted board).
Praxis:  Integrity of learned movements, such as ability to imitate 
gestures (wave goodbye) or pant omime use of objects to command 
(“Show me how you would use a hammer”).
Gnosis:  Perceptual integrity of awaren ess and recognition, such as 
recognition of faces and colors.
Social cognition 
(recognition of 
emotions, theory 
of mind)Major:  Behavior clearly out of acceptable social range; shows 
insensitivity to social standards of modesty in dress or of polit-
ical, religious, or sexual topics of conversation. Focuses exces-
sively on a topic despite group’s disinterest or direct feedback. 
Behavioral intention without regard to family or friends. 
Makes decisions without regard to safety (e.g., inappropriate 
clothing for weather or social setting). Typically, has little 
insight into these changes.
Mild:  Has subtle changes in behavior or attitude, often described 
as a change in personality, such as less ability to recognize 
social cues or read facial expressions, decreased empathy, 
increased extraversion or introversion, decreased inhibition, 
or subtle or episodic apathy or restlessness.Recognition of emotions:  Identification of emot ion in images of faces 
representing a variety of both positive and negative emotions.
Theory of mind:  Ability to consider another person’s mental state 
(thoughts, desires, intentions) or experience—story cards with 
questions to elicit information about the mental stat e of the individ-
uals portrayed, such as “Where will the girl look for the lost bag?” 
or “Why is the boy sad?”  TABLE 1 Neurocognitive domains (continued)
Cognitive domain Examples of symptoms or  observations Examples of assessments 
596 Neurocognitive Disorders
Delirium
Diagnostic Criteria    
A. A disturbance in attention (i.e., reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift atten-
tion) and awareness (reduced orientation to the environment).
B. The disturbance develops over a short period of time (usually hours to a few days), rep-
resents a change from baseline attention and awareness, and tends to fluctuate in se-
verity during the course of a day.
C. An additional disturbance in cognition (e.g., memory deficit, disorientation, language,
visuospatial ability, or perception). 
D. The disturbances in Criteria A and C are not better explained by another preexisting,
established, or evolving neurocognitive disorder and do not occur in the context of a
severely reduced level of arousal, such as coma.
E. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
disturbance is a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition, sub-
stance intoxication or withdrawal (i.e., due to a drug of abuse or to a medication), or
exposure to a toxin, or is due to multiple etiologies.
Specify whether:
Substance intoxication delirium:  This diagnosis should be made instead of sub-
stance intoxication when the symptoms in Criteria A and C predominate in the clinical
picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance] in-
toxication delirium are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM code
depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for
the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the
substance intoxication delirium, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician
should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance intoxication de-
lirium (e.g., “mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine intoxication delirium”). If a mod-
erate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance intoxication
delirium, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moderate
[substance] use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the
severity of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance
use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th posi-
tion character is “9,” and the clinician should record only the substance intoxication
delirium.
ICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CMWith use 
disorder, 
mildWith use 
disorder, 
moderate or 
severeWithout use 
disorder
Alcohol 291.0 F10.121 F10.221 F10.921
Cannabis 292.81 F12.121 F12.221 F12.921
Phencyclidine 292.81 F16.121 F16.221 F16.921
Other hallucinogen 292.81 F16.121 F16.221 F16.921
Inhalant 292.81 F18.121 F18.221 F18.921
Opioid 292.81 F11.121 F11.221 F11.921
Delirium 597
Substance withdrawal delirium:  This diagnosis should be made instead of sub-
stance withdrawal when the symptoms in Criteria A and C predominate in the clinical
picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
Code  [specific substance] withdrawal delirium: 291.0 (F10.231)  alcohol; 292.0
(F11.23)  opioid; 292.0 (F13.231)  sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic; 292.0 (F19.231)
other (or unknown) substance/medication.
Medication-induced delirium:  This diagnosis applies when the symptoms in Criteria
A and C arise as a side effect of a medication taken as prescribed.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code for [specific medication]-induced delirium is
292.81. The ICD-10-CM code depends on the type of medication. If the medication
is an opioid taken as prescribed, the code is F11.921.  If the medication is a seda-
tive, hypnotic, or anxiolytic taken as prescribed, the code is F13.921.  If the medica-
tion is an amphetamine-type or other stimulant taken as prescribed, the code is
F15.921.  For medications that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexametha-
sone) and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the
specific class of substance is unknown, the code is F19.921.
293.0 (F05) Delirium due to another medical condition:  There is evidence from the
history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is attributable
to the physiological consequences of another medical condition.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the
delirium (e.g., 293.0 [F05] delirium due to hepatic encephalopathy). The other med-
ical condition should also be coded and listed separately immediately before the
delirium due to another medical condition (e.g., 572.2 [K72.90] hepatic encepha-
lopathy; 293.0 [F05] delirium due to hepatic encephalopathy).
293.0 (F05) Delirium due to  multiple etiologies:  There is evidence from the history,
physical examination, or laboratory findings that the delirium has more than one etiol-
ogy (e.g., more than one etiological medical condition; another medical condition plus
substance intoxication or medication side effect).
Coding note:  Use multiple separate codes reflecting specific delirium etiologies
(e.g., 572.2 [K72.90] hepatic encephalopathy, 293.0 [F05] delirium due to hepatic
failure; 291.0 [F10.231] alcohol withdrawal de lirium). Note that the etiological med-
ical condition both appears as a separate code that precedes the delirium code and
is substituted into the delirium due to another medical condition rubric. 
Specify if:
Acute:  Lasting a few hours or days.
Persistent:  Lasting weeks or months.Sedative, hypnotic, or anxioly tic 292.81 F13.121 F13.221 F13.921
Amphetamine (or other 
stimulant)292.81 F15.121 F15.221 F15.921
Cocaine 292.81 F14.121 F14.221 F14.921
Other (or unknown) substance 292.81 F19.121 F19.221 F19.921ICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CMWith use 
disorder, 
mildWith use 
disorder, 
moderate or 
severeWithout use 
disorder
598 Neurocognitive Disorders
Specify if:
Hyperactive:  The individual has a hyperactive level of psychomotor activity that may be
accompanied by mood lability, agitation, and/or refusal to cooperate with medical care.
Hypoactive:  The individual has a hypoactive level of psychomotor activity that may be
accompanied by sluggishness and lethargy that approaches stupor.
Mixed level of activity: The individual has a normal level of psychomotor activity even
though attention and awareness are disturbed. Also includes individuals whose activity
level rapidly fluctuates.
Recording Procedures
Substance intoxication delirium
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication intoxication delirium begins with
the specific substance (e.g., co caine, dexamethasone) that is  presumed to be causing the
delirium. The diagnostic code is  selected from the table includ ed in the criteria set, which
is based on the drug class. For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexa-
methasone), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a sub-
stance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown,
the category “unknown substance” should be used.
The name of the disorder is followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), followed by
the specifier indicating level of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed
level of activity). Unlike the recording proc edures for ICD-10-CM, which combine the sub-
stance/medication intoxication delirium and subs tance use disorder into a single code, for
ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is give n for the substance use disorder. For example,
in the case of acute hyperactive intoxication delirium occurring in a man with a severe co-
caine use disorder, the diagnosis is 292.81 cocaine intoxication delirium, acute, hyperac-
tive. An additional diagnosis of 304.20 severe cocaine use disorder is also given. If the
intoxication delirium occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-
time heavy use of the substance), no accompan ying substance use disorder is noted (e.g.,
292.81 phencyclidine intoxication delirium, acute, hypoactive).
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/ medication intoxication de lirium begins with the
specific substance (e.g., cocaine,  dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the delirium.
The diagnostic code is selected from the table in cluded in the criteria set, which is based on the
drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For substances that
do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other substance” should
be used; and in cases in which a substance is judg ed to be an etiological factor but the specific
class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” foll owed by the name of th e substance intoxication
delirium, followed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), follo wed by the specifier indicating
level of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive, mixed level of activity). For exam-
ple, in the case of acute hyperactive intoxication  delirium occurring in a man with a severe co-
caine use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.221 severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine
intoxication delirium, acute, hy peractive. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe cocaine
use disorder is not given. If the intoxication delirium occurs without a comorbid substance use
disorder (e.g., after a one-time  heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use
disorder is noted (e.g., F16.921 phencyclidine intoxication delirium, acute, hypoactive). 
Substance withdrawal delirium
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication withdrawal delirium  begins with the
specific substance (e.g., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing the withdrawal delirium. The
diagnostic code is selected from substance-spec ific codes included in the coding note included
Delirium 599
in the criteria set. The name of the disorder is fo llowed by the course (i.e., acute, persistent), fol-
lowed by the specifier indicating level of psycho motor activity (i.e., hy peractive, hypoactive,
mixed level of activity). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM, which combine the
substance/medication withdrawal delirium and su bstance use disorder into a single code, for
ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for the substance use disorder. For example, in
the case of acute hyperactive withdrawal delirium  occurring in a man with a severe alcohol use
disorder, the diagnosis is 291.0 alcohol withdrawal  delirium, acute, hyperactive. An additional
diagnosis of 303.90 severe alcohol use disorder is also given.
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substa nce/medication withdrawal delirium begins with
the specific substance (e.g., al cohol) that is presumed to be causing the withdrawal delir-
ium. The diagnostic code is selected from su bstance-specific codes included in the coding
note included in the criteria set. When re cording the name of the disorder, the comorbid
moderate or severe substance use disorder (if any) is listed first, followed by the word
“with,” followed by the substance withdrawal delirium, followed by the course (i.e., acute,
persistent), followed by the specifier indicating  level of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyper-
active, hypoactive, mixed level of activity). Fo r example, in the case of acute hyperactive
withdrawal delirium occurring in a man with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis
is F10.231 severe alcohol use disorder with alcohol withdrawal delirium, acute, hyperac-
tive. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe alcohol use disorder is not given. 
Medication-induced delirium. The name of the medication-induced delirium begins
with the specific substance (e.g., dexamethasone) that is presumed to be causing the de-
lirium. The name of the disorder is followed by the course (i.e., acute,  persistent), followed
by the specifier indicating le vel of psychomotor activity (i.e., hyperactive, hypoactive,
mixed level of activity). For example, in th e case of acute hyperactive medication-induced
delirium occurring in a man using dexamethasone as prescribed, the diagnosis is 292.81
(F19.921) dexamethasone-induced delirium, acute, hyperactive.
Specifiers
Regarding course, in hospital settings, delirium usually lasts about 1 week, but some
symptoms often persist even after indivi duals are discharged from the hospital. 
Individuals with delirium may rapidly switch between hyperactive and hypoactive
states. The hyperactive state may be more common or more frequently recognized and
often is associated with medication side effe cts and drug withdrawal . The hypoactive state
may be more frequent in older adults.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of deliriu m is a disturbance of attention or awareness that is accom-
panied by a change in baseline cognition that  cannot be better explained by a preexisting
or evolving neurocognitive disorder (NCD). The disturbance in attention (Criterion A) is
manifested by reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift attention. Questions must
be repeated because the individual’s attentio n wanders, or the individual may perseverate
with an answer to a previous question rather  than appropriately shift attention. The indi-
vidual is easily distracted by irrelevant st imuli. The disturbance in awareness is mani-
fested by a reduced orientation to the environment or at times even to oneself.
The disturbance develops over a short period  of time, usually hours to a few days, and
tends to fluctuate during the course of the day, often with worsen ing in the evening and
night when external orienting stimuli decrease  (Criterion B). There is evidence from the
history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is a physiologi-
cal consequence of an underlying medical condition, substance intoxication or with-
drawal, use of a medication, or a toxin ex posure, or a combinat ion of these factors
(Criterion E). The etiology should be coded a ccording to the etiologically appropriate sub-
type (i.e., substance or medication intoxica tion, substance withdr awal, another medical
600 Neurocognitive Disorders
condition, or multiple etiologi es). Delirium often occurs in  the context of an underlying
NCD. The impaired brain function of individuals with mild and major NCD renders them
more vulnerable to delirium.
There is an accompanying change in at le ast one other area that may include memory
and learning (particularly recent memory), diso rientation (particularly to time and place),
alteration in language, or perceptual distorti on or a perceptual-motor disturbance (Crite-
rion C). The perceptual dist urbances accompanying delirium include misinterpretations,
illusions, or hallucinations; these disturbances are typically visual, but may occur in other
modalities as well, and range from simple an d uniform to highly complex. Normal atten-
tion/arousal, delirium, and coma lie on a cont inuum, with coma defined as the lack of any
response to verbal stimuli. The ability to evaluate cognition to diagnose delirium depends
on there being a level of arousal sufficient for response to verbal stim ulation; hence, delir-
ium should not be diagnosed in the context of coma (Criterion D). Many noncomatose pa-
tients have a reduced level of arousal. Those patients who show only minimal responses to
verbal stimulation are incapable of engaging with attempts at standardized testing or even
interview. This inability to engage should be  classified as severe inattention. Low-arousal
states (of acute onset) should be recognized as indicating severe inattention and cognitive
change, and hence delirium. They are clinically indistinguishable from delirium diag-
nosed on the basis of inattentio n or cognitive change elicited through cognitive testing and
interview. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Delirium is often associated with a disturbanc e in the sleep-wake cycl e. This disturbance
can include daytime sleepiness, nighttime ag itation, difficulty falling asleep, excessive
sleepiness throughout the day, or wakefulnes s throughout the night.  In some cases, com-
plete reversal of the night-day sleep-wake cy cle can occur. Sleep-wake cycle disturbances
are very common in delirium and have been proposed as a core criterion for the diagnosis.
The individual with deliri um may exhibit emotional di sturbances, such as anxiety,
fear, depression, irritability, anger, euphori a, and apathy. There may be rapid and unpre-
dictable shifts from one emot ional state to another. The di sturbed emotional state may also
be evident in calling out, screaming, cursin g, muttering, moaning, or making other
sounds. These behaviors are especially prevalent at nigh t and under conditions in which
stimulation and environmen tal cues are lacking. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of delirium is highest amon g hospitalized older individuals and varies
depending on the individuals’ characteristics, setting of care, and se nsitivity of the detec-
tion method. The prevalence of delirium in the community overall is low (1%–2%) but in-
creases with age, rising to 14% among individuals older than 85 years. The prevalence is
10%–30% in older individuals presenting to emergency departments, where the delirium
often indicates a medical illness. 
The prevalence of delirium when individuals are admitted to the hospital ranges from
14% to 24%, and estimates of the incidence of delirium arising du ring hospitalization
range from 6% to 56% in general hospital populations. Delirium occurs in 15%–53% of
older individuals postoperatively and in 70% –87% of those in intensive care. Delirium oc-
curs in up to 60% of individuals in nursing ho mes or post–acute care settings and in up to
83% of all individuals at the end of life.
Development and Course
While the majority of individuals with deli rium have a full recovery with or without
treatment, early recognition and intervention usually shortens the duration of the delir-
Delirium 601
ium. Delirium may progress to stupor, coma, seizures, or death, particularly if the under-
lying cause remains untreated. Mortality amon g hospitalized individuals with delirium is
high, and as many as 40% of individuals with  delirium, particularly those with malignan-
cies and other significant underlying medical illness, die within a year after diagnosis. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Delirium may be increased in the cont ext of functional impairment, im-
mobility, a history of falls, low levels of activity, and use of drugs and medications with
psychoactive properties (particularly alcohol and anticholinergics).
Genetic and physiological. Both major and mild NCDs can increase the risk for delir-
ium and complicate the course. Older individu als are especially susceptible to delirium
compared with younger adults. Susceptibilit y to delirium in infancy and through child-
hood may be greater than in early and mi ddle adulthood. In ch ildhood, delirium may be
related to febrile illnesses and certain medications (e.g., anticholinergics).
Diagnostic Markers
In addition to laboratory find ings characteristic of underlying medical conditions (or in-
toxication or withdrawal states), there is often generalized slowing on electroencephalog-
raphy, and fast activity is oc casionally found (e.g., in some cases of alcohol withdrawal
delirium). However, electroence phalography is insufficiently sensitive and specific for di-
agnostic use.
Functional Consequences of Delirium 
Delirium itself is associated with increased functional decline and risk of institutional
placement. Hospitalized individuals 65 years or older with delirium have three times the
risk of nursing home placemen t and about three times the func tional decline as hospital-
ized patients without delirium at both discharge and 3 months postdischarge. 
Differential Diagnosis 
Psychotic disorders and bipolar and depre ssive disorders with psychotic features.
Delirium that is characterized by vivid hallucinations, delusions, language disturbances,
and agitation must be distinguished from br ief psychotic disorder, schizophrenia, schizo-
phreniform disorder, and other psychotic disord ers, as well as from bipolar and depres-
sive disorders with psychotic features.
Acute stress disorder. Delirium associated with fear, an xiety, and dissociative symptoms,
such as depersonalization, must be distingu ished from acute stress disorder, which is pre-
cipitated by exposure to a severely traumatic event.
Malingering and factitious disorder. Delirium can be distinguished from these disor-
ders on the basis of the often atypical presen tation in malingering and factitious disorder
and the absence of another medical condition or substance that is etiologically related to
the apparent cognitive disturbance.
Other neurocognitive disorders. The most common differential diagnostic issue when
evaluating confusion in older adults is dise ntangling symptoms of delirium and dementia.
The clinician must determine whether the in dividual has delirium; a delirium superim-
posed on a preexisting NCD, such as that due to Alzheimer’s disease; or an NCD without
delirium. The traditional distinction between delirium and dementia according to acute-
ness of onset and temporal course is particularly difficult in those elderly individuals who
had a prior NCD that may not have been reco gnized, or who develop persistent cognitive
impairment following an episode of delirium. 
602 Neurocognitive Disorders
Other Specified Delirium
780.09 (R41.0)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of delirium that
cause clinically significant distress or impairm ent in social, occupational, or other impor-
tant areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for delirium or any of
the disorders in the neurocognitive disorders diagnostic class. The other specified delirium
category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific
reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for delirium or any specific neuro-
cognitive disorder. This is done by recording “other specified delirium” followed by the spe-
cific reason (e.g., “attenuated delirium syndrome”).
An example of a presentation that can be specified using the “other specified” desig-
nation is the following:
Attenuated delirium syndrome:  This syndrome applies in cases of delirium in which
the severity of cognitive impairment falls short of that required for the diagnosis, or in
which some, but not all, diagnostic criteria for delirium are met.
Unspecified Delirium
780.09 (R41.0)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of delirium that
cause clinically significant distress or impairm ent in social, occupational, or other impor-
tant areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for delirium or any of
the disorders in the neurocognitive disorder s diagnostic class. The unspecified delirium
category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the reason that
the criteria are not met for delirium, and includes presentations for which there is insuffi-
cient information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).
Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorders
Major Neurocognitive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Evidence of significant cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one
or more cognitive domains (complex attent ion, executive function, learning and mem-
ory, language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:
1. Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has
been a significant decline in cognitive function; and
2. A substantial impairment in cognitive performance, preferably documented by stan-
dardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical
assessment.
B. The cognitive deficits interfere with independence in everyday activities (i.e., at a min-
imum, requiring assistance with complex instrumental activities of daily living such as
paying bills or managing medications).
C. The cognitive deficits do not occur e xclusively in the context of a delirium.
Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorders 603
D. The cognitive deficits are not better explai ned by another mental disorder (e.g., major
depressive disorder, schizophrenia).
Specify whether due to:
Alzheimer’s disease  (pp. 611–614)
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration  (pp. 614–618)
Lewy body disease (pp. 618–621)
Vascular disease (pp. 621–624)
Traumatic brain injury  (pp. 624–627)
Substance/medication use  (pp. 627–632)
HIV infection  (pp. 632–634)
Prion disease  (pp. 634–636)
Parkinson’s disease (pp. 636–638)
Huntington’s disease (pp. 638–641)
Another medical condition  (pp. 641–642)
Multiple etiologies (pp. 642–643)
Unspecified  (p. 643)
Coding note: Code based on medical or substance etiology. In some cases, there is need
for an additional code for the etiological medi cal condition, which must immediately pre-
cede the diagnostic code for major neurocognitive disorder, as follows: 
Etiological subtypeAssociated etiological 
medical code for major 
neurocognitive disorderaMajor neurocogni-
tive disorder codebMild neurocogni-
tive disorder codec
Alzheimer’s 
diseaseProbable: 331.0 (G30.9)
Possible: no additional 
medical codeProbable: 294.1x 
(F02.8x)
Possible: 331.9 
(G31.9)c331.83 (G31.84)
(Do not use addi-
tional code for 
Alzheimer’s 
disease.)
Frontotemporal 
lobar degeneration Probable: 331.19 
(G31.09)
Possible: no additional 
medical codeProbable: 294.1x 
(F02.8x)
Possible: 331.9 
(G31.9)c331.83 (G31.84) 
(Do not use addi-
tional code for 
frontotemporal 
disease.)
Lewy body disease Probable: 331.82 
(G31.83)
Possible: no additional 
medical codeProbable: 294.1x 
(F02.8x)
Possible: 331.9 
(G31.9)c331.83 (G31.84) 
(Do not use addi-
tional code for 
Lewy body disease.)
Vascular disease No additional medical 
codeProbable: 290.40 
(F01.5x)
Possible: 331.9 
(G31.9)c331.83 (G31.84) 
(Do not use addi-
tional code for the 
vascular disease.)
Traumatic brain 
injury907.0 (S06.2X9S) 294.1x (F02.8x) 331.83 (G31.84)
(Do not use additional 
code for the trau-
matic brain injury.)
Substance/
medication-
inducedNo additional medical 
codeCode based on the 
type of substance 
causing the major 
neurocognitive 
disorderc, dCode based on the 
type of substance 
causing the mild 
neurocognitive 
disorderd
604 Neurocognitive Disorders
HIV infection 042 (B20) 294.1x (F02.8x) 331.83 (G31.84) 
(Do not use addi-
tional code for HIV 
infection.)
Prion disease 046.79 (A81.9) 294.1x (F02.8x) 331.83 (G31.84)
(Do not use addi-
tional code for 
prion disease.)
Parkinson’s 
diseaseProbable: 332.0 (G20)
Possible: No additional 
medical codeProbable: 294.1x 
(F02.8x)
Possible: 331.9 
(G31.9)c331.83 (G31.84) 
(Do not use addi-
tional code for 
Parkinson’s 
disease.)
Huntington’s 
disease333.4 (G10) 294.1x (F02.8x) 331.83 (G31.84)
(Do not use addi-
tional code for 
Huntington’s 
disease.)
Due to another 
medical conditionCode the other medical 
condition first 
(e.g., 340 [G35] 
multiple sclerosis)294.1x (F02.8x) 331.83 (G31.84)
(Do not use addi-
tional codes for the 
presumed etiologi-
cal medical condi-
tions.)
Due to multiple 
etiologiesCode all of the etiological 
medical conditions first 
(with the exception of 
vascular disease) 294.1x (F02.8x) 
(Plus the code for 
the relevant sub-
stance/medication-
induced major neu-
rocognitive disor-
ders if substances 
or medications 
play a role in the 
etiology.)331.83 (G31.84) 
(Plus the code for 
the relevant sub-
stance/medication-
induced mild neuro-
cognitive disor-
ders if substances 
or medications play 
a role in the etiol-
ogy. Do not use ad-
ditional codes for 
the presumed 
etiological medical 
conditions.)
Unspecified neuro-
cognitive disorderNo additional medical 
code799.59 (R41.9) 799.59 (R41.9)
aCode first, before code for major neurocognitive disorder.
bCode fifth character based on symptom specifier: .x0 without behavioral disturbance; .x1 with be-
havioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms, mo od disturbance, agitatio n, apathy, or other be-
havioral symptoms).
cNote:  Behavioral disturbance specifier cannot be coded but should still be indicated in writing.
dSee “Substance/Medication-Induced Majo r or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder.”Etiological subtypeAssociated etiological 
medical code for major 
neurocognitive disorderaMajor neurocogni-
tive disorder codebMild neurocogni-
tive disorder codec
Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorders 605
Specify: 
Without behavioral disturbance:  If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by
any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.
With behavioral disturbance  (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is ac-
companied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms,
mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).
Specify current severity:
Mild:  Difficulties with instrumental activities  of daily living (e.g., housework, managing
money).
Moderate: Difficulties with basic activities of daily living (e.g., feeding, dressing).
Severe:  Fully dependent.
Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Evidence of modest cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or
more cognitive domains (complex attention, executive function, learning and memory,
language, perceptual-motor, or social cognition) based on:
1. Concern of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician that there has
been a mild decline in cognitive function; and
2. A modest impairment in cognitive per formance, preferably documented by stan-
dardized neuropsychological testing or, in its absence, another quantified clinical
assessment.
B. The cognitive deficits do not interfere with capacity for independence in everyday
activities (i.e., complex instrumental activities of daily living such as paying bills or
managing medications are preserved, but gr eater effort, compensatory strategies, or
accommodation may be required).
C. The cognitive deficits do not occur e xclusively in the context of a delirium.
D. The cognitive deficits are not better explai ned by another mental disorder (e.g., major
depressive disorder, schizophrenia).
Specify whether due to:
Alzheimer’s disease  (pp. 611–614)
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration  (pp. 614–618)
Lewy body disease (pp. 618–621)
Vascular disease (pp. 621–624)
Traumatic brain injury  (pp. 624–627)
Substance/medication use  (pp. 627–632)
HIV infection  (pp. 632–634)
Prion disease  (pp. 634–636)
Parkinson’s disease  (pp. 636–638)
Huntington’s disease (pp. 638–641)
Another medical condition  (pp. 641–642)
Multiple etiologies (pp. 642–643)
Unspecified  (p. 643)
Coding note: For mild neurocognitive disorder due to any of the medical etiologies listed
above, code 331.83 (G31.84).  Do not  use additional codes for the presumed etiological
medical conditions. For substance/medicati on-induced mild neurocognitive disorder, code
based on type of substance; see “Substance/ Medication-Induced Major or Mild Neurocog-
nitive Disorder.” For unspecified mild neurocognitive disorder, code 799.59 (R41.9).  
606 Neurocognitive Disorders
Specify: 
Without behavioral disturbance:  If the cognitive disturbance is not accompanied by
any clinically significant behavioral disturbance.
With behavioral disturbance  (specify disturbance): If the cognitive disturbance is ac-
companied by a clinically significant behavioral disturbance (e.g., psychotic symptoms,
mood disturbance, agitation, apathy, or other behavioral symptoms).
Subtypes
Major and mild neurocognitive disorders (NCD s) are primarily subtyped according to the
known or presumed etiological/pa thological entity or entities  underlying the cognitive de-
cline. These subtypes are distin guished on the basis of a combin ation of time course, charac-
teristic domains affected, and associated sy mptoms. For certain etio logical subtypes, the
diagnosis depends substantially on the presence of a potentially causative entity, such as Par-
kinson’s or Huntington’s disease, or a traumati c brain injury or stroke in the appropriate time
period. For other etiological subt ypes (generally the neurodegenerative diseases like Alzhei-
mer’s disease, frontotemporal lobar degenerati on, and Lewy body disease), the diagnosis is
based primarily on the cognitive, behavioral, an d functional symptoms. Typically, the differ-
entiation among these syndromes that lack an independently recognized etiological entity is
clearer at the level of major NCD than at the level of mild NCD, but sometimes characteristic
symptoms and associated features are present at the mild level as well. 
NCDs are frequently managed by clinicians  in multiple disciplines. For many sub-
types, multidisciplinary international expert groups have developed specialized consen-
sus criteria based on clinicopathological corr elation with underlying brain pathology. The
subtype criteria here have been harm onized with those expert criteria.
Specifiers
Evidence for distinct be havioral features in NCDs has been recognized, particularly in the
areas of psychotic symptoms and depression . Psychotic features are common in many
NCDs, particularly at the mild-to-moderate stage of major NCDs due to Alzheimer’s dis-
ease, Lewy body disease, an d frontotemporal lobar degene ration. Paranoia and other
delusions are common features, and often a persecutory theme may be a prominent aspect
of delusional ideation. In contrast to psychotic disorders with onset in earlier life (e.g.,
schizophrenia), disorganized speech and diso rganized behavior are not characteristic of
psychosis in NCDs. Hallucinations may occur in any modality, although visual hallucina-
tions are more common in NCDs than in de pressive, bipolar, or psychotic disorders.
Mood disturbances, including depression, anxiety, and elat ion, may occur. Depression
is common early in the course (including at the mild NCD level) of NCD due to Alzhei-
mer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease, while elation may occur more commonly in fron-
totemporal lobar degeneration. When a full a ffective syndrome meetin g diagnostic criteria
for a depressive or bipolar disorder is pres ent, that diagnosis should be coded as well.
Mood symptoms are increasingly recognized to be a significant feature in the earliest stages
of mild NCDs such that clinical recogn ition and intervention may be important.
Agitation is common in a wide variety of NCDs, particularly in major NCD of moder-
ate to severe severity, and often occurs in th e setting of confusion or frustration. It may
arise as combative behaviors, particularly in the context of resisting caregiving duties such
as bathing and dressing. Agitation is characte rized as disruptive motor or vocal activity
and tends to occur with advanced stages of cognitive impairment across all of the NCDs.
Individuals with NCD can present with a wi de variety of behavioral symptoms that
are the focus of treatment. Sleep disturbance is a common symptom that can create a need
for clinical attention and may include symptoms of insomnia, hypersomnia, and circadian
rhythm disturbances.
Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorders 607
Apathy is common in mild and mild major NCD. It is observed particularly in NCD due
to Alzheimer’s disease and ma y be a prominent feature of NCD due to frontotemporal
lobar degeneration. Apathy is typically char acterized by diminished motivation and re-
duced goal-directed behavior  accompanied by decreased emotional responsiveness.
Symptoms of apathy may manifest early in the course of NCDs when a loss of motivation
to pursue daily activities or hobbies may be observed.
Other important behavioral symptoms include wandering, disinhibition, hyperpha-
gia, and hoarding. Some of these symptoms are characteristic of specific disorders, as dis-
cussed in the relevant sections. When more th an one behavioral disturbance is observed,
each type should be noted in writing with the specifier “with behavioral symptoms.” 
Diagnostic Features
Major and mild NCDs exist on a spectrum of cognitive and functional impairment. Major
NCD corresponds to the conditio n referred to in DSM-IV as dementia,  retained as an alter-
native in this volume. The co re feature of NCDs is acquir ed cognitive decline in one or
more cognitive domains (Criterion A) based on  both 1) a concern about cognition on the
part of the individual, a knowledgeable informant, or the clinician, and 2) performance on
an objective assessment that falls below the expected level or that has been observed to de-
cline over time. Both a concer n and objective evidence are re quired because they are com-
plementary. When there is an  exclusive focus on objectiv e testing, a disorder may go
undiagnosed in high-functioning individuals whose currently “normal” performance ac-
tually represents a substantial decline in abilities, or an illness may be incorrectly diag-
nosed in individuals whose currently “low” performance does not represent a change
from their own baseline or is a result of extraneous factors li ke test conditions or a passing
illness. Alternatively, excessive focus on subj ective symptoms may fail to diagnose illness
in individuals with poor insigh t, or whose informants deny or fail to notice their symptoms,
or it may be overly sensitiv e in the so-called worried well.
A cognitive concern differs from a complaint in that it may or may not be voiced spon-
taneously. Rather, it may need to be elicited  by careful questioning about specific symp-
toms that commonly occur in individuals wi th cognitive deficits (see Table 1 in the
introduction to this chapter). For example, memory concerns include difficulty remember-
ing a short grocery list or keeping track of the plot of a television program; executive con-
cerns include difficulty resuming a task wh en interrupted, organizing tax records, or
planning a holiday meal. At the mild NCD level,  the individual is likely to describe these
tasks as being more difficult or as requiring ex tra time or effort or compensatory strategies.
At the major NCD level, such tasks may on ly be completed with assistance or may be
abandoned altogether. At the mild NCD level, individuals and their families may not no-
tice such symptoms or may view them as norm al, particularly in the elderly; thus, careful
history taking is of paramount importance. The difficulties must represent changes rather
than lifelong patterns: the individual or info rmant may clarify this i ssue, or the clinician
can infer change from prior experience with the patient or from occupational or other
clues. It is also critical to determine that the difficulties are related to cognitive loss rather
than to motor or sensory limitations. 
Neuropsychological testing,  with performance compared with norms appropriate to
the patient’s age, educational attainment, and cultural background, is part of the standard
evaluation of NCDs and is part icularly critical in the evaluation of mild NCD. For major
NCD, performance is typically 2 or more standard deviations below appropriate norms
(3rd percentile or below). For mild NCD, performance typically lies in the 1–2 standard de-
viation range (between the 3rd and 16th perc entiles). However, neur opsychological test-
ing is not available in all settings, and neuropsychological thresholds are sensitive to the
specific test(s) and norms employed, as well as to test conditions, sensory limitations, and
intercurrent illness. A variety of brief office-based or “bedside” asse ssments, as described
608 Neurocognitive Disorders
in Table 1, can also supply objective data in settings where such testing is unavailable or
infeasible. In any case, as with cognitive co ncerns, objective perfor mance must be inter-
preted in light of the individual’s prior pe rformance. Optimally, this information would
be available from a prior administration of the same test, but often it must be inferred
based on appropriate norms, along with the individual’s educational history, occupation,
and other factors. Norms are more challenging to interpret in individuals with very high
or very low levels of education and in indivi duals being tested outside their own language
or cultural background. 
Criterion B relates to the individual’s leve l of independence in everyday functioning.
Individuals with major NCD will have impairment  of sufficient severity so as to interfere
with independence, such that others will have to take over tasks that the individuals were
previously able to complete on their own. Individuals with mild NCD will have preserved
independence, although there may be subtle in terference with function or a report that
tasks require more effort or take more time than previously. 
The distinction between major and mild NCD is inherently arbitrary, and the disorders
exist along a continuum. Precis e thresholds are therefore difficult to determine. Careful
history taking, observation, and integration wi th other findings are required, and the im-
plications of diagnosis should be considered when an individual’s clinical manifestations
lie at a boundary.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Typically the associated features that suppo rt a diagnosis of major or mild NCD will be
specific to the etiological subtype (e.g., neur oleptic sensitivity and visual hallucinations in
NCD due to Lewy body disease). Diagnostic features specific to each of the subtypes are
found in the relevant sections.
Prevalence
The prevalence of NCD varies widely by ag e and by etiological su btype. Overall preva-
lence estimates are generally only availabl e for older population s. Among individuals
older than 60 years, prevalence increases steep ly with age, so prev alence estimates are
more accurate for narrow age bands than for br oad categories such as “over 65” (where the
mean age can vary greatly with the life expect ancy of the given population). For those eti-
ological subtypes occurring across the lifespa n, prevalence estimates for NCD are likely to
be available, if at all, only  as the fraction of individuals who develop NCD among those
with the relevant condition (e.g., tr aumatic brain injury, HIV infection).
Overall prevalence estimates for dementia (which is largely congruent with major
NCD) are approximately 1%–2% at age 65 years and as high as 30% by age 85 years. The
prevalence of mild NCD is very sensitive to th e definition of the di sorder, particularly in
community settings, where evaluations are less de tailed. In addition, in contrast with clin-
ical settings, where cognitive concern must be high to seek and locate care, there may be a
less clear decline from baseline functioning. Es timates of the prevalence of mild cognitive
impairment (which is substantially congruent with mild NCD) among older individuals
are fairly variable, ranging from 2% to 10% at age 65 and 5% to 25% by age 85.
Development and Course 
The course of NCD varies acro ss etiological subtypes, and this variation can be useful in
differential diagnosis. Some subtypes (e.g., those related to traumatic brain injury or
stroke) typically begin at a specific time and (at least after initial symptoms related to in-
flammation or swelling subside) remain stat ic. Others may fluctuate over time (although
if this occurs, the possibility  of delirium superimposed on  NCD should be considered).
NCDs due to neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s disease or frontotemporal
lobar degeneration typically are marked by insidious onset and gradual progression, and
Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorders 609
the pattern of onset of cognitive deficits and associated features helps to distinguish among
them. 
NCDs with onset in childhood and adolescence may have broad repercussions for so-
cial and intellectual development, and in th is setting intellectual disability (intellectual
developmental disorder) and/or other neurod evelopmental disorders may also be diag-
nosed to capture the full diagnostic picture and ensure the provision of a broad range of
services. In older individuals, NCDs often occu r in the setting of medical illnesses, frailty,
and sensory loss, which complicate the clin ical picture for diagnosis and treatment. 
When cognitive loss occurs in youth to midlife, individuals and families are likely to
seek care. NCDs are typically easiest to identify at younger ages, although in some settings
malingering or other factitious disorders may be a concern. Very late in life, cognitive
symptoms may not cause concern or may go unnoticed. In late life, mild NCD must also be
distinguished from the more mo dest deficits associated with “normal aging,” although a
substantial fraction of what has been ascribe d to normal aging likely represents prodromal
phases of various NCDs. In addition, it beco mes harder to recognize mild NCD with age
because of the increasing prevalence of me dical illness and sensory deficits. It becomes
harder to differentiate among subtypes with ag e because there are multiple potential sources
of neurocognitive decline.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Risk factors vary not only by etiological subtype but also by age at onset within etiological
subtypes. Some subtypes are distributed thro ughout the lifespan, whereas others occur
exclusively or primarily in late  life. Even within the NCDs of aging, the relative prevalence
varies with age: Alzheimer’s disease is unco mmon before age 60 years, and the prevalence
increases steeply thereafter, while the overa ll less common frontotemporal lobar degener-
ation has earlier onset and represents a progre ssively smaller fraction of NCDs with age. 
Genetic and physiological. The strongest risk factor for major and mild NCDs is age,
primarily because age increases the risk of  neurodegenerative and cerebrovascular dis-
ease. Female gender is associat ed with higher prevalence of dementia overall, and especially
Alzheimer’s disease, but this difference is larg ely, if not wholly, attr ibutable to greater lon-
gevity in females. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Individuals’ and families’ level of awareness and concern about neurocognitive symp-
toms may vary across ethnic and occupational groups. Neurocognitive symptoms are
more likely to be noticed, particularly at the mild level, in individuals who engage in com-
plex occupational, domestic, or recreational activities. In addition , norms for neuropsy-
chological testing tend to be available only for broad populations, and thus they may not
be easily applicable to individuals with less  than high school ed ucation or those being
evaluated outside their primary language or culture. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Like age, culture, and occupa tion, gender issues may affect the level of concern and aware-
ness of cognitive symptoms. In addition, for la te-life NCDs, females are likely to be older,
to have more medical comorbidity, and to liv e alone, which can complicate evaluation and
treatment. In addition, there are gender differ ences in the frequency of some of the etio-
logical subtypes.
Diagnostic Markers
In addition to a careful history, neuropsych ological assessments are the key measures for
diagnosis of NCDs, particularly at the mild level, where functional changes are minimal
610 Neurocognitive Disorders
and symptoms more subtle. Ideally, individu als will be referred for formal neuropsycho-
logical testing, which will provide a quantitative assessment of all relevant domains and
thus help with diagnosis; provide guidance to the family on areas where the individual
may require more support; and serve as a be nchmark for further decline or response to
therapies. When such testing is  unavailable or not feasible, the brief assessments in Table 1
can provide insight into each domain. More glob al brief mental status tests may be helpful
but may be insensitive, particul arly to modest changes in a single domain or in those with
high premorbid abilities, and may be overly sensitive in those with low premorbid abilities.
In distinguishing among etiological subtypes, additional diagnostic markers may
come into play, particularly neuroimaging studies such as magnetic resonance imaging
scans and positron emission tomography scans. In addition, specific markers may be in-
volved in the assessment of specific subtypes  and may become more important as addi-
tional research findings accumulate over time, as discussed in the relevant sections. 
Functional Consequences of 
Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorders 
By definition, major and mild NCDs affect func tioning, given the central role of cognition in
human life. Thus, the criteria for the disorder s, and the threshold for differentiating mild
from major NCD, are based in part on functi onal assessment. Within major NCD there is a
broad range of functional impairment, as implem ented in the severity specifiers. In addition,
the specific functions that are compromised can help identify the cognitive domains affected,
particularly when neuropsychological testing is  not available or is difficult to interpret. 
Differential Diagnosis
Normal cognition. The differential diagnosis between  normal cognition and mild NCD,
as between mild and major NCD, is challenging because the boundaries are inherently ar-
bitrary. Careful history taking and objective as sessment are critical to  these distinctions. A
longitudinal evaluation using quantified a ssessments may be key in detecting mild NCD.
Delirium. Both mild and major NCD may be difficult to distinguish from a persistent de-
lirium, which can co-occur. Careful assessment  of attention and arou sal will help to make
the distinction.
Major depressive disorder. The distinction between mild NCD and major depressive
disorder, which may co-occur with NCD, can also be challenging. Specific patterns of cog-
nitive deficits may be helpfu l. For example, consistent memory and executive function
deficits are typical of Alzheimer’s disease, whereas nonspecific or more variable perfor-
mance is seen in major depression. Alternat ively, treatment of the depressive disorder
with repeated observation over time may be required to make the diagnosis.
Specific learning disorder and other neurodevelopmental disorders. A careful clari-
fication of the individual’s baseline status will help distinguish an NCD from a specific
learning disorder or other neurodevelopmental disorders.  Additional issues may enter the
differential for specific etiological subtypes, as described in the relevant sections.
Comorbidity 
NCDs are common in older individuals and thus  often co-occur with a wide variety of age-
related diseases that may co mplicate diagnosis or treatme nt. Most notable of these is
delirium, for which NCD increases the risk. In  older individuals, a delirium during hos-
pitalization is, in many cases, the first time that an NCD is noticed, although a careful his-
tory will often reveal evidence  of earlier decline. Mixed NC Ds are also common in older
individuals, as many etiological entities incre ase in prevalence with age. In younger indi-
viduals, NCD often co-occurs with neurodevelop mental disorders; for example, a head in-
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Alzheimer’s Disease 611
jury in a preschool child may also lead to significant developmental and learning issues.
Additional comorbidity of NCD is often relate d to the etiological subtype, as discussed in
the relevant sections. 
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
 Due to Alzheimer’s Disease
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment in one or more cognitive
domains (for major neurocognitive disorder, at least two domains must be impaired).
C. Criteria are met for either probable or possible Alzheimer’s disease as follows:
For major neurocognitive disorder:
Probable Alzheimer’s disease is diagnosed if either of the following is present; oth-
erwise, possible Alzheimer’s disease  should be diagnosed.
1. Evidence of a causative Alzheimer’s disease genetic mutation from family history
or genetic testing. 
2. All three of the following are present:
a. Clear evidence of decline in memory and learning and at least one other cogni-
tive domain (based on detailed history or serial neuropsychological testing).
b. Steadily progressive, gradual decline in cognition, without extended plateaus.
c. No evidence of mixed etiology (i.e., absence of other neurodegenerative or
cerebrovascular disease, or another neurological, mental, or systemic disease
or condition likely contributing to cognitive decline).
For mild neurocognitive disorder:
Probable Alzheimer’s disease  is diagnosed if there is evidence of a causative Alz-
heimer’s disease genetic mutation from either genetic testing or family history.
Possible Alzheimer’s disease  is diagnosed if there is no evidence of a causative Alz-
heimer’s disease genetic mutation from either genetic testing or family history, and all
three of the following are present:
1. Clear evidence of decline in memory and learning.
2. Steadily progressive, gradual decline in cognition, without extended plateaus.
3. No evidence of mixed etiology (i.e., absence of other neurodegenerative or cere-
brovascular disease, or another neurologica l or systemic disease or condition likely
contributing to cognitive decline).
D. The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another neurode-
generative disease, the effects of a substance, or another mental, neurological, or sys-
temic disorder.
Coding note: For probable major neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease,
with behavioral disturbance, code first 331.0 (G30.9)  Alzheimer’s disease, followed by
294.11 (F02.81)  major neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease. For probable
neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, without behavioral disturbance, code
first 331.0 (G30.9)  Alzheimer’s disease, followed by 294.10 (F02.80)  major neurocognitive
disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, without behavioral disturbance.
For possible major neurocognitive disor der due to Alzheimer’s disease, code 331.9
(G31.9)  possible major neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease. ( Note:  Do not
use the additional code for Alzheimer’s disease. Behavioral disturbance cannot be coded
but should still be indicated in writing.)
612 Neurocognitive Disorders
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, code 331.83 (G31.84).
(Note:  Do not  use the additional code for Alzheimer’s disease. Behavioral disturbance
cannot be coded but should still be indicated in writing.)
Diagnostic Features 
Beyond the neurocognitive disorder (NCD) syndro me (Criterion A), the core features of ma-
jor or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease include an insidious onset and gradual pro-
gression of cognitive and beha vioral symptoms (Criterion B) . The typical presentation is
amnestic (i.e., with impairment in memory  and learning). Unusual nonamnestic presen-
tations, particularly visuospa tial and logopenic aphasic vari ants, also exist. At the mild
NCD phase, Alzheimer’s disease manifests typically with impairment in memory and learn-
ing, sometimes accompanied by deficits in executive function. At the major NCD phase,
visuoconstructional/perceptual -motor ability and language w ill also be impaired, partic-
ularly when the NCD is moderate to severe. Social cognition tends to be preserved until
late in the course of the disease. 
A level of diagnostic certainty must be sp ecified denoting Alzheimer’s disease as the
“probable” or “possible” etiology (Criterion C). Probable Alzheimer’s disease  is diagnosed in
both major and mild NCD if there is evidence  of a causative Alzheimer’s disease gene, ei-
ther from genetic testing or from an autosomal dominant family history coupled with au-
topsy confirmation or a genetic test in an affected family member. For major NCD, a
typical clinical picture, without extended plat eaus or evidence of mixed etiology, can also
be diagnosed as due to probab le Alzheimer’s disease. For mild NCD, given the lesser de-
gree of certainty that the deficits will prog ress, these features are only sufficient for a
possible  Alzheimer’s etiology. If the etiology appe ars mixed, mild NCD due to multiple eti-
ologies should be diagnosed. In any case, for both mild and major NCD due to Alzhei-
mer’s disease, the clinical features must no t suggest another primary etiology for the NCD
(Criterion D). 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
In specialty clinical settings, approximately 80% of individuals with major NCD due to
Alzheimer’s disease have behavioral and psyc hological manifestations; these features are
also frequent at the mild NCD stage of impa irment. These symptoms are as or more dis-
tressing than cognitive manifestations and ar e frequently the reason that health care is
sought. At the mild NCD stage or the mildest level of majo r NCD, depression and/or ap-
athy are often seen. With moderately severe major NCD, psychotic fe atures, irritability,
agitation, combativeness, and wandering are common. Late in the illness, gait distur-
bance, dysphagia, incontinence, myoc lonus, and seizures are observed.
Prevalence
The prevalence of overall deme ntia (major NCD) rises steeply with age. In high-income
countries, it ranges from 5% to 10% in the seventh decade to  at least 25% thereafter. U.S.
census data estimates suggest that approxim ately 7% of individuals diagnosed with Alz-
heimer’s disease are between ages 65 and 74 years, 53% are between ages 75 and 84 years,
and 40% are 85 years and older. The percentage  of dementias attributable to Alzheimer’s
disease ranges from about 60% to over 90%, depending on the setting and diagnostic cri-
teria. Mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease is likely to represent a substantial fraction of
mild cognitive impairment (MCI) as well.
Development and Course
Major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease progresses gradually, sometimes with
brief plateaus, through severe dementia to death. The mean duration of survival after di-
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Alzheimer’s Disease 613
agnosis is approximately 10 years, reflecting th e advanced age of the majority of individ-
uals rather than the course of the disease; some individuals can live with the disease for as
long as 20 years. Late-stage individuals are eventually mute and bedbound. Death most
commonly results from aspiration in those who survive through the full course. In mild
NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease, impairments increase over time, and functional status
gradually declines until symptoms reach the threshold for the diagnosis of major NCD. 
The onset of symptoms is usually in the eighth and ninth decades; early-onset forms
seen in the fifth and sixth decades are often related to known causative mutations. Symp-
toms and pathology do not differ markedly at different onset ages. However, younger in-
dividuals are more likely to survive the full course of the disease, while older individuals
are more likely to have numerous medical co morbidities that affect the course and man-
agement of the illness. Diagnostic complexity is  higher in older adults because of the in-
creased likelihood of comorbid me dical illness and mixed pathology.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Traumatic brain injury increases risk  for major or mild NCD due to Alz-
heimer’s disease.
Genetic and physiological. Age is the strongest risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. The
genetic susceptibility polymorphism apolipoprotein E4 increases risk and decreases age
at onset, particularly in homozygous individu als. There are also extremely rare causative
Alzheimer’s disease genes. Individuals with Down’s syndrome (trisomy 21) develop Alz-
heimer’s disease if they survive to midlife. Multiple vascular risk factors influence risk for
Alzheimer’s disease and may act by increasing  cerebrovascular pathology or also through
direct effects on Alzheimer pathology. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Detection of an NCD may be more difficult in  cultural and socioeconomic settings where
memory loss is considered normal in old age, where older adults face fewer cognitive de-
mands in everyday life, or where very low educational levels pose greater challenges to
objective cognitive assessment.
Diagnostic Markers
Cortical atrophy, amyloid-predominant neuritic plaques, and tau-predominant neurofibril-
lary tangles are hallmarks of the pathological diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease and may be
confirmed via postmortem histopathological examination. For early-onset cases with auto-
somal dominant inheritance, a mutation in on e of the known causative Alzheimer’s disease
genes—amyloid precursor protein (APP), presen ilin 1 (PSEN1), or presenilin 2 (PSEN2)—
may be involved, and genetic testing for such mutations is commercially available, at least
for PSEN1. Apolipoprotein E4 cannot serve as a diagnostic marker because it is only a risk
factor and neither necessary nor sufficient for disease occurrence.
Since amyloid beta-42 deposition in the br ain occurs early in the pathophysiological
cascade, amyloid-based diagnostic tests such  as amyloid imaging on brain positron emis-
sion tomography (PET) scans and reduced leve ls of amyloid beta-42 in the cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) may have diagnostic value. Signs of neuronal injury, such as hippocampal and
temporoparietal cortical atrophy on a magnetic resonance image scan, temporoparietal
hypometabolism on a fluorodeoxyglucose PET sc an, and evidence for elevated total tau
and phospho-tau levels in CSF,  provide evidence of neuronal  damage but are less specific
for Alzheimer’s disease. At present, these biomarkers are not fully validated, and many
are available only in tertiary care settings. However, some of them, along with novel bio-
markers, will likely move into wider clinical practice in the coming years. 
614 Neurocognitive Disorders
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild 
Neurocognitive Disorder Du e to Alzheimer’s Disease
The prominence of memory loss can cause significant difficulties relatively early in the
course. Social cognition (and thus social func tioning) and procedural memory (e.g., danc-
ing, playing musical instruments) may be relatively preserved for extended periods.
Differential Diagnosis
Other neurocognitive disorders. Major and mild NCDs due to other neurodegenera-
tive processes (e.g., Lewy body disease, fron totemporal lobar degene ration) share the in-
sidious onset and gradual decline caused by Alzheimer’s disease but have distinctive core
features of their own. In major or mild vascular NCD, th ere is typically history of stroke
temporally related to the onset of cognitive impairment, and infarcts or white matter hy-
perintensities are judged sufficient to accoun t for the clinical picture. However, particu-
larly when there is no clear hi story of stepwise decline, ma jor or mild vascular NCD can
share many clinical features with Alzheimer’s disease. 
Other concurrent, active neurological or systemic illness. Other neurological or sys-
temic illness should be considered if there is an appropriate temporal relationship and
severity to account for the clinical picture. At the mild NCD level, it may be difficult to dis-
tinguish an Alzheimer’s disease etiology from that of another medical condition (e.g., thy-
roid disorders, vitamin B12 deficiency). 
Major depressive disorder. Particularly at the mild NCD level, the differential diagnosis
also includes major depression. The presence of depression may be associated with re-
duced daily functioning and poor concentration that may resemble an NCD, but improve-
ment with treatment of depression may be  useful in making the distinction. 
Comorbidity
Most individuals with Alzheimer’s disease are elderly and have multiple medical conditions
that can complicate diagnosis and influence th e clinical course. Major or mild NCD due to
Alzheimer’s disease commonly co-occurs with cerebrovascular disease, which contributes
to the clinical picture. When a comorbid condition contribute s to the NCD in an individual
with Alzheimer’s disease, then NCD due to multiple etiologies should be diagnosed.
Major or Mild Frontotemporal
Neurocognitive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. The disturbance has insidious onset and gradual progression.
C. Either (1) or (2):
1. Behavioral variant:
a. Three or more of the following behavioral symptoms:
i. Behavioral disinhibition.
ii. Apathy or inertia.
iii. Loss of sympathy or empathy.
iv. Perseverative, stereotyped or compulsive/ritualistic behavior.
v. Hyperorality and dietary changes.
b. Prominent decline in social cognition and/or executive abilities.
Major or Mild Frontotemporal Neurocognitive Disorder 615
2. Language variant:
a. Prominent decline in language ability, in the form of speech production, word
finding, object naming, grammar, or word comprehension.
D. Relative sparing of learning and memory and perceptual-motor function.
E. The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another neurode-
generative disease, the effects of a substance, or another mental, neurological, or sys-
temic disorder.
Probable frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder  is diagnosed if either of the following
is present; otherwise, possible frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder  should be di-
agnosed: 
1. Evidence of a causative frontotemporal neur ocognitive disorder genetic mutation, from
either family history or genetic testing.
2. Evidence of disproportionate frontal and/or temporal lobe involvement from neuroim-
aging.
Possible frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder  is diagnosed if there is no evidence
of a genetic mutation, and neuroimaging has not been performed.
Coding note: For probable major neurocognitive disorder due to frontotemporal lobar de-
generation, with behavioral disturbance, code first 331.19 (G31.09) frontotemporal dis-
ease, followed by 294.11 (F02.81)  probable major neurocognitive disorder due to
frontotemporal lobar degeneration, with behavioral disturbance. For probable major neu-
rocognitive disorder due to frontotemporal  lobar degeneration, without behavioral distur-
bance, code first 331.19 (G31.09) frontotemporal disease, followed by 294.10 (F02.80)
probable major neurocognitive disorder due to frontotemporal lobar degeneration, without
behavioral disturbance.
For possible major neurocognitive disorder due to frontotemporal lobar degeneration, code
331.9 (G31.9)  possible major neurocognitive disorder due to frontotemporal lobar degen-
eration. ( Note:  Do not use the additional code for frontote mporal disease. Behavioral distur-
bance cannot be coded but should still be indicated in writing.)
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to frontotemporal lobar degeneration, code 331.83
(G31.84).  (Note:  Do not use the additional code for frontotemporal disease. Behavioral
disturbance cannot be coded but should still be indicated in writing.)
Diagnostic Features
Major or mild frontotemporal neurocognitive  disorder (NCD) comprises a number of syn-
dromic variants characterized by the progressi ve development of behavioral and personality
change and/or language impairment. The behavioral variant and three language variants (se-
mantic, agrammatic/nonfluent, and logopenic) ex hibit distinct patterns of brain atrophy and
some distinctive neuropathology. The criteria must be met for either the behavioral or the lan-
guage variant to make the diagnosis, but many  individuals present with features of both.
Individuals with behavioral-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD present with
varying degrees of apathy or disinhibition. They may lose interest in socialization, self-
care, and personal responsibilities, or displa y socially inappropriate behaviors. Insight is
usually impaired, and this often delays medical consultation. The first referral is often to a
psychiatrist. Individuals may develop changes in  social style, and in religious and political
beliefs, with repetitive movements, hoarding, changes in ea ting behavior, and hyperoral-
ity. In later stages, loss of sphincter contro l may occur. Cognitive decline is less prominent,
and formal testing may show relatively few deficits in the early stages. Common neuro-
cognitive symptoms are lack of planning and organization, distractib ility, and poor judg-
ment. Deficits in executive function, such  as poor performance on tests of mental
616 Neurocognitive Disorders
flexibility, abstract reasoning, and response inhibition, are present, but learning and mem-
ory are relatively spared, and perceptual-mot or abilities are almost always preserved in
the early stages. 
Individuals with language-variant major or mild frontotemporal NCD present with pri-
mary progressive aphasia with gradual onse t, with three subtypes commonly described:
semantic variant, agrammatic/n onfluent variant, and logopenic variant, and each variant
has distinctive features and corresponding neuropathology.
“Probable” is distinguished from “possibl e” frontotemporal NCD by the presence of
causative genetic factors (e.g., mutations in the gene coding for microtubule-associated pro-
tein tau) or by the presence of distinctive at rophy or reduced activity in frontotemporal re-
gions on structural or functional imaging. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Extrapyramidal features may be prominent in  some cases, with an overlap with syn-
dromes such as progressive supranuclear pa lsy and corticobasal dege neration. Features of
motor neuron disease may be present in some  cases (e.g., muscle atrophy, weakness). A
subset of individuals develop visual hallucinations.
Prevalence
Major or mild frontotemporal NCD is a common  cause of early-onset NCD in individuals
younger than 65 years. Population prevalen ce estimates are in th e range of 2–10 per
100,000. Approximately 20%–25% of cases of  frontotemporal NCD occur in individuals
older than 65 years. Frontotemporal NCD accoun ts for about 5% of all cases of dementia in
unselected autopsy series. Prevalence estima tes of behavioral variant and semantic lan-
guage variant are higher among males, and prevalence estimates of nonfluent language
variant are higher among females. 
Development and Course
Individuals with major or m ild frontotemporal NCD commonly present in the sixth de-
cade of life, although the age at onset varies from the third to the ninth decades. The dis-
ease is gradually progressive, with median  survival being 6–11 years after symptom onset
and 3–4 years after diagnosis. Survival is shorter and decline is faster in major or mild fron-
totemporal NCD than in typical Alzheimer’s disease. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Approximately 40% of individuals with major or mild fron-
totemporal NCD have a family history of early-onset NCD, and approximately 10% show an
autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. A number of genetic factors have been identified,
such as mutations in the gene  encoding the microtubule asso ciated protein tau (MAPT), the
granulin gene (GRN), and the C9ORF72 gene. A number of families with causative muta-
tions have been identified (see the section “D iagnostic Markers” for th is disorder), but many
individuals with known familial transmission do not have a known mutation. The presence
of motor neuron disease is associated  with a more rapi d deterioration. 
Diagnostic Markers
Computed tomography (CT) or structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may show
distinct patterns of atrophy. In behavioral-variant major or mild  frontotemporal NCD,
both frontal lobes (especially the medial frontal lobes) and the anterior temporal lobes are
atrophic. In semantic language–variant majo r or mild frontotemporal NCD, the middle,
inferior, and anterior temporal lobes are at rophic bilaterally but asymmetrically, with the
Major or Mild Frontotemporal Neurocognitive Disorder 617
left side usually being more affected. Nonfluent la nguage–variant major or mild fronto-
temporal NCD is associated with predominantly left posterior fr ontal-insular atrophy.
The logopenic variant of major or mild fron totemporal NCD is associated with predomi-
nantly left posterior perisylvian or parietal atrophy. Functional imaging demonstrates hy-
poperfusion and/or cortical hypometabolism in the corresponding brain regions, which
may be present in the early stages in the abse nce of structural abno rmality. Emerging bio-
markers for Alzheimer’s disease (e.g., cerebrospinal fluid amyl oid-beta and tau levels, and
amyloid imaging) may help in the differential  diagnosis, but the dist inction from Alzhei-
mer’s disease can remain difficult (the logopeni c variant is in fact often a manifestation of
Alzheimer’s disease).
In familial cases of frontotemporal NCD, the identification of genetic mutations may
help confirm the diagnosis. Mutations associated with frontote mporal NCD include
the genes encoding microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) and granulin (GRN),
C9ORF72, transactive response DNA-binding  protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43, or TARDBP),
valosin-containing protein (V CP), chromatin modifying protein 2B (CHMP2B), and fused
in sarcoma protein (FUS). 
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild 
Frontotemporal Neurocognitive Disorder
Because of the relative early age at onset of the disorder, the disorder oftens affects work-
place and family life. Because of the involvem ent of language and/or behavior, function is
often more severely impaired relatively early in the course . For individuals with the be-
havioral variant, prior to diagnostic clarific ation there may be significant family disrup-
tion, legal involvement, and problems in the workplace because of socially inappropriate
behaviors. The functional impairment due to  behavioral change and language dysfunc-
tion, which can include hyperorality, impuls ive wandering, and other dishinhibited be-
haviors, may far exceed that due to the co gnitive disturbance and may lead to nursing
home placement or institutionalization. Thes e behaviors can be severely disruptive, even
in structured care settings, particularly wh en the individuals are otherwise healthy, non-
frail, and free of othe r medical comorbidities. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other neurocognitive disorders. Other neurodegenerative diseases may be distinguished
from major or mild frontotemporal NCD by th eir characteristic features. In major or mild
NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease, decline in learning and memory is an early feature.
However, 10%–30% of patients presenting with  a syndrome suggestive of major or mild
frontotemporal NCD are found at  autopsy to have Alzheimer’s disease pathology. This oc-
curs more frequently in individuals who present with progressi ve dysexecutive syn-
dromes in the absence of behavioral changes or movement disorder or in those with the
logopenic variant.
In major or mild NCD with Lewy bodies, co re and suggestive features of Lewy bodies
must be present. In major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease, spontaneous parkin-
sonism emerges well befo re the cognitive decline. In majo r or mild vascular NCD, depend-
ing on affected brain regions, there may also  be loss of executive ability and behavioral
changes such as apathy, and this disorder should  be considered in the differential diagno-
sis. However, history of a cerebrovascular event is temporally related to the onset of cog-
nitive impairment in major or mild vascular NCD, and neuroimaging reveals infarctions
or white matter lesions sufficient to account for the clinical picture. 
Other neurological conditions. Major or mild frontotemporal NCD overlaps with pro-
gressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal  degeneration, and motor neuron disease
clinically as well as pathologically. Progressive supranuclear palsy is characterized by
618 Neurocognitive Disorders
supranuclear gaze palsies and axial-predominant parkinsoni sm. Pseudobulbar signs may
be present, and retropulsion is often prom inent. Neurocognitive assessment shows psy-
chomotor slowing, poor working memory, and executive dysfunction. Corticobasal degen-
eration presents with asymmetr ic rigidity, limb apraxia, postural instability, myoclonus,
alien limb phenomenon, and cortical sensory loss. Many individuals wi th behavioral-variant
major or mild frontotemporal NCD show features of motor neuron disease, which tend to
be mixed upper and predominantly lower motor neuron disease. 
Other mental disorders and medical conditions. Behavioral-variant major or mild fron-
totemporal NCD may be mistaken for a primary mental disorder, such as major depression,
bipolar disorders, or schizophrenia, and individuals with this variant often present initially
to psychiatry. Over time, the development of  progressive neurocognitive difficulties will
help to make the distinction. A careful medi cal evaluation will help to exclude treatable
causes of NCDs, such as meta bolic disturbances, nutritional deficiencies, and infections. 
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
With Lewy Bodies
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. The disorder has an insidious onset and gradual progression.
C. The disorder meets a combination of core diagnostic features and suggestive diagnos-
tic features for either probable or possibl e neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies.
For probable major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies,  the indi-
vidual has two core features, or one suggestive  feature with one or more core features.
For possible major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies,  the individ-
ual has only one core feature, or one or more suggestive features.
1. Core diagnostic features: 
a. Fluctuating cognition with pronounced variations in attention and alertness.
b. Recurrent visual hallucinations that are well formed and detailed.
c. Spontaneous features of parkinsonism, with onset subsequent to the develop-
ment of cognitive decline.
2. Suggestive diagnostic features:
a. Meets criteria for rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder.
b. Severe neuroleptic sensitivity.
D. The disturbance is not better explained by cerebrovascular disease, another neurode-
generative disease, the effects of a substance, or another mental, neurological, or sys-
temic disorder.
Coding note:  For probable major neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, with behav-
ioral disturbance, code first 331.82 (G31.83) Lewy body disease, followed by 294.11
(F02.81)  probable major neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, with behavioral distur-
bance. For probable major neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, without behavioral
disturbance, code first 331.82 (G31.83)  Lewy body disease, followed by 294.10 (F02.80)
probable major neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, without behavioral disturbance.
For possible major neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, code 331.9 (G31.9)  possible
major neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies. ( Note:  Do not use the additional code for
Lewy body disease. Behavioral disturbance cannot be coded but should still be indicated
in writing.)
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder With Lewy Bodies 619
For mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, code 331.83 (G31.84). ( Note:  Do not
use the additional code for Lewy body disease. Behavioral disturbance cannot be coded
but should still be indicated in writing.)
Diagnostic Features
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies (NCDLB), in the case of major
neurocognitive disorder (NCD), corresponds  to the condition known as dementia with
Lewy bodies (DLB). The disorder includes  not only progressive cognitive impairment
(with early changes in complex attention and ex ecutive function rather than learning and
memory) but also recurrent complex visual hallucinations; and concurrent symptoms of
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior diso rder (which can be a very early manifes-
tation); as well as hallucinations in other sensory modalities, depression, and delusions.
The symptoms fluctuate in a pattern that can resemble a delirium, but no adequate under-
lying cause can be found. The variable pres entation of NCDLB symptoms reduces the like-
lihood of all symptoms being observed in a brief clinic visit and necessitates a thorough
assessment of caregive r observations. The use of assessment scales specifically designed to
assess fluctuation may aid in diagnosis. Anot her core feature is spontaneous parkinson-
ism, which must begin after the onset of cognit ive decline; by convention, major cognitive
deficits are observed at least 1 year befo re the motor symptoms. The parkinsonism must
also be distinguished from neuroleptic-induce d extrapyramidal signs.  Accurate diagnosis
is essential to safe treatment planning, as up  to 50% of individuals with NCDLB have se-
vere sensitivity to neuroleptic drugs, and these medications should be used with extreme
caution in managing the psychotic manifestations.
The diagnosis of mild NCDLB is appropriate for individuals who present with the core
or suggestive features at a stage when cognitive or functional impairments are not of suf-
ficient severity to fulfill criteria for major NC D. However, as for all mild NCDs, there will
often be insufficient ev idence to justify any si ngle etiology, and use of the unspecified di-
agnosis is most appropriate.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with NCDLB frequently experience  repeated falls and syncope and transient
episodes of unexplained loss of consciousness. Autonomic dysfunction, such as ortho-
static hypotension and urinary incontinen ce, may be observed. Auditory and other
nonvisual hallucinations are common, as are sy stematized delusions, delusional misiden-
tification, and depression.
Prevalence
The few population-based prev alence estimates for NCDLB available range from 0.1% to
5% of the general elderly popu lation, and from 1.7% to 30.5 % of all dementia cases. In
brain bank (autopsy) series, the pathological lesions known as Lewy bodies are present in
20%–35% of cases of dementia. The male-to- female ratio is approximately 1.5:1. 
Development and Course 
NCDLB is a gradually progressive disorder with  insidious onset. However, there is often
a prodromal history of confusional episodes (delirium) of acute onset, often precipitated
by illness or surgery. The distinction between NCDLB, in which Lewy bodies are primar-
ily cortical in location, and major or mild NC D due to Parkinson’s disease, in which the pa-
thology is primarily in the basal ganglia, is  the order in which th e cognitive and motor
symptoms emerge. In NCDLB, th e cognitive decline is manifest ed early in the course of ill-
ness, at least a year before the onset of mo tor symptoms (see the section “Differential Di-
620 Neurocognitive Disorders
agnosis” for this disorder). Disease course may be characterized by occasional plateaus
but eventually progresses through severe deme ntia to death. Average duration of survival
is 5–7 years in clinical series. Onset of symptoms is typically observed from the sixth
through the ninth decades of life, with most cases having their onset when affected indi-
viduals are in their mid-70s.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Genetic and physiological. Familial aggregation may occur, and several risk genes have
been identified, but in most cases of NCDLB, there is no family history.
Diagnostic Markers
The underlying neurodegenerative disease is  primarily a synucleinopathy due to alpha-
synuclein misfolding and aggregation. Cognitiv e testing beyond the use of a brief screen-
ing instrument may be necessary to define de ficits clearly. Assessment scales developed to
measure fluctuation can be useful. The associated condition REM sl eep behavior disorder
may be diagnosed through a formal sleep study or identified by questioning the patient or
informant about relevant symptoms. Neurolep tic sensitivity (challenge) is not recom-
mended as a diagnostic marker but raises suspicion of NCDLB if it occurs. A diagnosti-
cally suggestive feature is low striatal dopa mine transporter uptake on single photon
emission computed tomography  (SPECT) or positron emission tomography (PET) scan.
Other clinically useful markers potentially include relative preservation of medial tempo-
ral structures on computed tomography (C T)/magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain
scan; reduced striatal dopamine transporter uptake on SPECT/PET scan; generalized low
uptake on SPECT/PET perfusion scan with re duced occipital activity; abnormal (low up-
take) MIBG myocardial scintigraphy suggest ing sympathetic denervation; and prominent
slow-wave activity on the electroencephalo gram with temporal lobe transient waves.
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild 
Neurocognitive Disord er With Lewy Bodies
Individuals with NCDLB are more  functionally impaired than would be expected for their
cognitive deficits when contrasted to individuals with other neurodegenerative diseases,
such as Alzheimer’s disease. This is largely a result of motor and autonomic impairments,
which cause problems with toileting, transfer ring, and eating. Sleep disorders and prom-
inent psychiatric symptoms may also add to functional di fficulties. Consequently, the qual-
ity of life of individuals with NCDLB is often significantly worse than that of individuals
with Alzheimer’s disease.
Differential Diagnosis 
Major or mild neurocognitive diso rder due to Parkinson’s disease. A key differenti-
ating feature in clinical diagnosis is the tempor al sequence in which the parkinsonism and
the NCD appear. For NCD due to Parkinson’s disease, the individual must develop cog-
nitive decline in the context of established Parkinson’s disease; by convention, the decline
should not reach the stage of major NCD until at least 1 year after Parkinson’s is diagnosed.
If less than a year has passed since the onset of motor symptoms, the diagnosis is NCDLB.
This distinction is clearer at the major NCD level than at the mild NCD level. 
The timing and sequence of parkinsonism an d mild NCD may be more difficult to de-
termine because the onset and clinical presentation can be ambiguous, and unspecified
mild NCD should be diagnosed if the othe r core and suggestive features are absent.
Major or Mild Vascular Neurocognitive Disorder 621
Comorbidity 
Lewy body pathology frequent ly coexists with Alzheimer’s disease and cerebrovascular
disease pathology, particularly among the olde st age groups. In Alzheimer’s disease, there
is concomitant synuclein pathology in 60% of cases (if amygdala-restricted cases are in-
cluded). In general, there is a higher rate of Lewy body pathology in individuals with de-
mentia than in older individuals without dementia. 
Major or Mild Vascular Neurocognitive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. The clinical features are consistent with a vascular etiology, as suggested by either of
the following: 
1. Onset of the cognitive deficits is temporally related to one or more cerebrovascular
events.
2. Evidence for decline is prominent in complex attention (including processing
speed) and frontal-executive function.
C. There is evidence of the presence of cere brovascular disease from history, physical
examination, and/or neuroimaging consider ed sufficient to account for the neurocog-
nitive deficits. 
D. The symptoms are not better explained by another brain disease or systemic disorder.
Probable vascular neurocognitive disorder  is diagnosed if one of the following is pres-
ent; otherwise possible vascular neurocognitive disorder  should be diagnosed:
1. Clinical criteria are supported by neuroimaging evidence of significant parenchymal in-
jury attributed to cerebrovascula r disease (neuroimaging-supported).
2. The neurocognitive syndrome is temporally related to one or more documented cere-
brovascular events.
3. Both clinical and genetic (e.g., cerebral aut osomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical
infarcts and leukoencephalopathy) evidence of cerebrovascular disease is present.
Possible vascular neuroc ognitive disorder  is diagnosed if the clinical criteria are met
but neuroimaging is not available and the tem poral relationship of the neurocognitive syn-
drome with one or more cerebrovascular events is not established.
Coding note:  For probable major vascular neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral dis-
turbance, code 290.40 (F01.51). For probable major vascular neurocognitive disorder,
without behavioral disturbance, code 290.40 (F01.50). For possible major vascular neuro-
cognitive disorder, with or without behavioral disturbance, code 331.9 (G31.9).  An addi-
tional medical code for the cerebrovascular disease is not needed.
For mild vascular neurocognitive disorder, code 331.83 (G31.84). ( Note:  Do not use an
additional code for the vascular disease. Behavioral disturbance cannot be coded but
should still be indicated in writing.)
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of major or mild  vascular neurocognitive diso rder (NCD) requires the es-
tablishment of an NCD (Criterion A) and the determination that cere brovascular disease is
the dominant if not exclusive pathology that accounts for the cognitive deficits (Criteria B
and C). Vascular etiology may range from large vessel stroke to micr ovascular disease; the
622 Neurocognitive Disorders
presentation is therefore very heterogeneous, stemming from the types of vascular lesions
and their extent and location. The lesions may be focal, multifocal, or diffuse and occur in
various combinations. 
Many individuals with major or mild vascul ar NCD present with multiple infarctions,
with an acute stepwise or fluctuating dec line in cognition, and intervening periods of
stability and even some improvement. Others may have gradual onset with slow pro-
gression, a rapid development of deficits follo wed by relative stabilit y, or another complex
presentation. Major or mild vascular NCD wi th a gradual onset an d slow progression is
generally due to small vessel disease leading to lesions in the white matter, basal ganglia,
and/or thalamus. The gradual progression in these cases is often punctuated by acute
events that leave subtle neurological deficits. The cognitive deficits in these cases can be at-
tributed to disruption of cortical-subcortical  circuits, and complex attention, particularly
speed of information processing, and exec utive ability are likely to be affected.
Assessing for the presence of sufficient cerebrovascular disease relies on history, phys-
ical examination, and neuroimaging (Criterion  C). Etiological certainty requires the dem-
onstration of abnormalities on neuroimaging. The lack of neuroimaging can result in
significant diagnostic inaccuracy by overlooking “silent” brain infarction and white mat-
ter lesions. However, if the neurocognitive im pairment is temporally associated with one
or more well-documented  strokes, a probable diagnosis can be made in the absence of neu-
roimaging. Clinical evidence of cerebrovascular disease includes documented history of
stroke, with cognitive decline temporally assoc iated with the event, or physical signs con-
sistent with stroke (e.g., hemi paresis; pseudobulbar syndrome , visual field defect). Neuro-
imaging (magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] or computed tomography [CT]) evidence of
cerebrovascular disease comprises one or more of the following: one or more large vessel
infarcts or hemorrhages, a strategically placed  single infarct or hemorrhage (e.g., in angu-
lar gyrus, thalamus, basal forebrain), two or mo re lacunar infarcts outside the brain stem,
or extensive and confluent white matter lesions. The latter is often termed small vessel dis-
ease or subcortical ischemic changes  on clinical neuroimaging evaluations.
For mild vascular NCD, history of a single stroke or extensive white matter disease is gen-
erally sufficient. For major vascular NCD, two or more strokes, a strate gically placed stroke,
or a combination of white matter disease and one or more lacunes is  generally necessary.
The disorder must not be better explained by another disorder. For example, promi-
nent memory deficit early in the course mi ght suggest Alzheimer' s disease, early and
prominent parkinsonian features would suggest Parkinson's disease, and a close associa-
tion between onset and depression would suggest depression.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A neurological assessmen t often reveals history of stroke  and/or transient ischemic epi-
sodes, and signs indicative of brain infarctions. Also commonly associated are personality
and mood changes, abulia, depression, and emotional lability. The development of late-
onset depressive symptoms accompanied by psychomotor slowing and executive dys-
function is a common presentation among olde r adults with progressive small vessel isch-
emic disease (“vascular depression”).
Prevalence
Major or mild vascular NCD is the second most common cause of NCD after Alzheimer’s
disease. In the United States, population prevalence estimates for vascular dementia range
from 0.2% in the 65–70 years age group to 16%  in individuals 80 years and older. Within
3 months following stroke, 20%–30% of individuals are diagnosed with dementia. In neu-
ropathology series, the prevalence of vascular  dementia increases from 13% at age 70 years
to 44.6% at age 90 years or older, in comp arison with Alzheimer’s disease (23.6%–51%) and
combined vascular dementia and Alzheimer’s disease (2%–46.4%). Higher prevalence has
Major or Mild Vascular Neurocognitive Disorder 623
been reported in African Americans compared with Caucasians, and in East Asian countries
(e.g., Japan, China). Prevalence is  higher in males than in females.
Development and Course
Major or mild vascular NCD can occur at an y age, although the prevalence increases ex-
ponentially after age 65 years. In older indivi duals, additional pathologies may partly ac-
count for the neurocognitive de ficits. The course may vary fr om acute onset with partial
improvement to stepwise decline to progressive decline, with fluctuations and plateaus of
varying durations. Pure subcortical major or  mild vascular NCD can have a slowly pro-
gressive course that simulates major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. The neurocognitive outcomes of vascular brain injury are influenced by
neuroplasticity factors such as education, physical exercise, and mental activity.
Genetic and physiological. The major risk factors for major or mild vascular NCD are the
same as those for cerebrovascular disease, incl uding hypertension, diab etes, smoking, obesity,
high cholesterol levels, high homocysteine levels, other risk factors for atherosclerosis and ar-
teriolosclerosis, atrial fibrillati on, and other conditions increasing  the risk of cerebral emboli.
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy is an important risk factor in which amyloid deposits occur
within arterial vessels. Another key risk factor is the hereditary condition cerebral autosomal
dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy, or CADASIL.
Diagnostic Markers
Structural neuroimaging, using MRI or CT, ha s an important role in the diagnostic pro-
cess. There are no other established biomar kers of major or mild vascular NCD. 
Functional Consequences of 
Major or Mild Vascular Neurocognitive Disorder
Major or mild vascular NCD is commonly asso ciated with physical deficits that cause ad-
ditional disability. 
Differential Diagnosis 
Other neurocognitive disorders. Since incidental brain infarctions and white matter le-
sions are common in older individuals, it is important to consider other possible etiologies
when an NCD is present. A history of memory  deficit early in the course, and progressive
worsening of memory, language, executive function, and perceptual-motor abilities in the
absence of corresponding focal lesions on br ain imaging, are suggestive of Alzheimer’s
disease as the primary diagnosis. Potential bi omarkers currently being validated for Alz-
heimer’s disease, such as cerebrospinal fluid levels of beta-amyloid and phosphorylated
tau, and amyloid imaging, may prove to be helpful in the differential diagnosis. NCD with
Lewy bodies is distinguished fr om major or mild vascular NCD by its core features of fluc-
tuating cognition, visual hallu cinations, and spontaneous parkinsonism. While deficits in
executive function and language occur in majo r or mild vascular NC D, the insidious onset
and gradual progression of behavioral features or language impairment are characteristic
of frontotemporal NCD and are no t typical of vascular etiology.
Other medical conditions. A diagnosis of major or mild vascular NCD is not made if
other diseases (e.g., brain tumor, multiple sc lerosis, encephalitis, toxic or metabolic disor-
ders) are present and are of su fficient severity to account for the cognitive impairment.
624 Neurocognitive Disorders
Other mental disorders. A diagnosis of major or mild vascular NCD is inappropriate if
the symptoms can be entirely attributed to  delirium, although delirium may sometimes be
superimposed on a preexisting major or mild vascular NCD, in which case both diagnoses
can be made. If the criteria for major depressive disorder are met and the cognitive impair-
ment is temporally related to the likely onse t of the depression, major or mild vascular
NCD should not be diagnosed. However, if the NCD preceded the development of the de-
pression, or the severity of the cognitive impairment is out of proportion to the severity of
the depression, both should be diagnosed. 
Comorbidity
Major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s dise ase commonly co-occurs with major or mild
vascular NCD, in which case both diagnoses should be made. Major or mild vascular NCD
and depression frequently co-occur. 
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
Due to Traumatic Brain Injury
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is evidence of a traumatic brain injury—that is, an impact to the head or other
mechanisms of rapid movement or displacement of the brain within the skull, with one
or more of the following: 
1. Loss of consciousness.
2. Posttraumatic amnesia.
3. Disorientation and confusion.
4. Neurological signs (e.g., neuroimaging demonstrating injury; a new onset of sei-
zures; a marked worsening of a preexisting seizure disorder; visual field cuts; an-
osmia; hemiparesis).
C. The neurocognitive disorder presents imm ediately after the occurrence of the trau-
matic brain injury or immediately after recovery of consciousness and persists past the
acute post-injury period.
Coding note:  For major neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, with behavioral
disturbance: For ICD-9-CM, first code 907.0 late effect of intracranial injury without skull frac-
ture, followed by 294.11 major neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, with be-
havioral disturbance. For ICD-10-CM, first code S06.2X9S  diffuse traumatic brain injury with
loss of consciousness of unspecified duration, sequela; followed by F02.81  major neurocog-
nitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, with behavioral disturbance.
For major neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, without behavioral distur-
bance: For ICD-9-CM, first code 907.0 late effect of intracranial injury without skull fracture,
followed by 294.10 major neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, without be-
havioral disturbance. For ICD-10-CM, first code S06.2X9S  diffuse traumatic brain injury with
loss of consciousness of unspecified duration, sequela; followed by F02.80  major neurocog-
nitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, without behavioral disturbance.
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, code 331.83 (G31.84).
(Note:  Do not use the additional code for traumatic brain injury. Behavioral disturbance
cannot be coded but should still be indicated in writing.)
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Traumatic Brain Injury 625
Specifiers
Rate the severity of the neuroc ognitive disorder (NCD), not the underlying traumatic brain
injury (see the section “Development and Course” for this disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Major or mild NCD due to traumatic brain injury (TBI) is caused by an impact to the head,
or other mechanisms of rapid movement or di splacement of the brain within the skull, as
can happen with blast injuries. Traumatic brain injury  is defined as brain trauma with spe-
cific characteristics that include at least one of the following: loss of consciousness, post-
traumatic amnesia, diso rientation and confusion, or, in more severe cases, neurological
signs (e.g., positive neuroimaging, a new onset of seizures or a marked worsening of a pre-
existing seizure disorder, visual field cuts, anosmia, hemiparesi s) (Criterion B). To be at-
tributable to TBI, the NCD must  present either immediately after the brain injury occurs or
immediately after the individu al recovers consciousness afte r the injury and persist past
the acute post-injury period (Criterion C). 
The cognitive presentation is variable. Difficulties in the domains of complex attention,
executive ability, learning, an d memory are common as well as slowing in speed of infor-
mation processing and disturbances in social cognition. In more seve re TBI in which there
is brain contusion, intracranial hemorrhage, or  penetrating injury, there may be additional
neurocognitive deficits, such as aphasia, neglect, and constructional dyspraxia.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Major or mild NCD due to TBI may be accompanied by disturbances in emotional function
(e.g., irritability, easy frus tration, tension and anxiety, affective lability); personality
changes (e.g., disinhibition, apathy, suspic iousness, aggression); physical disturbances
(e.g., headache, fatigue, slee p disorders, vertigo or dizziness, tinnitus or hyperacusis, pho-
tosensitivity, anosmia, reduced tolerance to psychotropic medication s); and, particularly
in more severe TBI, neurolog ical symptoms and signs (e.g., seizures, hemiparesis, visual
disturbances, cranial nerve deficits) an d evidence of orthopedic injuries.
Prevalence
In the United States, 1.7 million TBIs occur a nnually, resulting in 1.4 million emergency de-
partment visits, 275,000 hospitalizations, and 52,000 deaths. About 2% of the population
lives with TBI-associated disabi lity. Males account for 59% of TBIs in the United States.
The most common etiologies of TBI in the Unit ed States are falls, vehicular accidents, and
being struck on the head. Collisions and blows to the head that occur in the course of con-
tact sports are increasingly re cognized as sources of mild TB I, with a concern that repeated
mild TBI may have cumulatively persisting sequelae.
Development and Course
The severity of a TBI is rated at the time of injury/initial assessment as mild, moderate, or
severe according to the thresholds in Table 2.
The severity rating of the TBI itself does not necessarily correspon d to the severity of
the resulting NCD. The course of recovery fr om TBI is variable, depending not only on the
specifics of the injury but also  on cofactors, such as age, prior history of brain damage, or
substance abuse, that may favor or impede recovery. 
626 Neurocognitive Disorders
Neurobehavioral symptoms tend to be most severe in the immediate aftermath of the
TBI. Except in the case of severe TBI, the typi cal course is that of complete or substantial
improvement in associated neurocognitive, neurological, and psyc hiatric symptoms and
signs. Neurocognitive symptoms associated with mild TBI tend to resolve within days to
weeks after the injury with complete resoluti on typical by 3 months. Other symptoms that
may potentially co-occur with the neurological  symptoms (e.g., depression, irritability,
fatigue, headache, photosensitivity, sleep dist urbance) also tend to resolve in the weeks
following mild TBI. Substantial subsequent deterioration in these areas should trigger con-
sideration of additional diagnoses. However,  repeated mild TBI may be associated with
persisting neurocognitive disturbance. 
With moderate and severe TBI, in addition to persistence of neurocognitive deficits,
there may be associated neurophysiological, emotional, and behavi oral complications.
These include seizures (particula rly in the first year), photosen sitivity, hyperacu sis, irritabil-
ity, aggression, depression, sl eep disturbance, fatigue, apat hy, inability to resume occu-
pational and social functioning at pre-injury level, and deterioration in interpersonal
relationships. Moderate and seve re TBI have been associated with increased risk of depres-
sion, aggression, and possibly  neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease.
The features of persisting majo r or mild NCD due to TBI will vary by age, specifics of
the injury, and cofactors. Persisting TBI-related impairment in an infant or child may be re-
flected in delays in reaching developmental mi lestones (e.g., language acquisition), worse
academic performance, and possibly impaired  social development. Among older teenag-
ers and adults, persisting symptoms may incl ude various neurocognitive deficits, irrita-
bility, hypersensitivity to light and sound, e asy fatigability, and mood changes, including
depression, anxiety, hostility, or apathy. In older individuals with depleted cognitive re-
serve, mild TBI is more  likely to result in incomplete recoveries.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Risk factors for traumatic brain injury. Traumatic brain injury rates vary by age, with
the highest prevalence among individuals younge r than 4 years, older adolescents, and in-
dividuals older than 65 years. Falls are the mo st common cause of TBI, with motor vehicle
accidents being second. Sports concussions are frequent causes of TBI in older children,
teenagers, and young adults.
Risk factors for neurocognitive disorder after traumatic brain injury. Repeated con-
cussions can lead to persistent NCD and neur opathological evidence of traumatic enceph-
alopathy. Co-occurring intoxication with a substance may incr ease the severity of a TBI
from a motor vehicle accident, but whether into xication at the time of injury worsens neu-
rocognitive outcome is unknown.
Course modifiers. Mild TBI generally resolves within a few weeks to months, although res-
olution may be delayed or incomplete in the context of repeated TB I. Worse outcome fromTABLE 2 Severity ratings for tr aumatic brain injury
Injury characteristic Mild TBI Moderate TBI Severe TBI
Loss of consciousness <30 min 30 minutes–24 hours >24 hours
Posttraumatic amnesia <24 ho urs 24 hours–7 days >7 days
Disorientation and confusion 
at initial assessment 
(Glasgow Coma Scale 
Score)13–15 (not below 13 
at 30 minutes)9–12 3–8
Substance/Medication-Induced Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder 627
moderate to severe TBI is associated with older ag e (older than 40 years) and initial clinical pa-
rameters, such as low Glasgow Coma Scale score; worse motor function; pupillary nonreac-
tivity; and computed tomography (CT) evidence of brain injury (e.g., petechial hemorrhages,
subarachnoid hemorrhage, midline shift, obliteration of third ventricle).
Diagnostic Markers
Beyond neuropsycholog ical testing, CT scanning may reveal petechial hemorrhages,
subarachnoid hemorrhage, or evidence of contusion. Magn etic resonance image scanning
may also reveal hyperintensities suggestive of microhemorrhages. 
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild 
Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Traumatic Brain Injury 
With mild NCD due to TBI, individuals may re port reduced cognitive efficiency, difficulty
concentrating, and lessened abilit y to perform usual activities. With major NCD due to TBI, an
individual may have di fficulty in independent living an d self-care. Prominent neuromotor
features, such as severe incoordination, ataxia , and motor slowing, may be present in major
NCD due to TBI and may add to functional diffi culties. Individuals with TBI histories report
more depressive symptoms, and these can amp lify cognitive complaints and worsen func-
tional outcome. Additionally, loss of emotional control, including aggre ssive or inappropriate
affect and apathy, may be present after more se vere TBI with greater neurocognitive impair-
ment. These features may compound difficulti es with independent living and self-care.
Differential Diagnosis
In some instances, severity of neurocognitive symptoms ma y appear to be inconsistent
with the severity of the TBI. After previously  undetected neurologic al complications (e.g.,
chronic hematoma) are excluded , the possibility of diagnoses such as somatic symptom
disorder or factitious disorder need to be considered. Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
can co-occur with the NCD and have overlappi ng symptoms (e.g., difficulty concentrat-
ing, depressed mood, aggressiv e behavioral disinhibition).
Comorbidity
Among individuals with substa nce use disorders, the neurocognitive effects of the sub-
stance contribute to or compound the TBI-as sociated neurocognitive change. Some symp-
toms associated with TBI may overlap with sy mptoms found in cases of PTSD, and the two
disorders may co-occur, especia lly in military populations. 
Substance/Medication-Induced
 Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. The neurocognitive impairments do not occur exclusively during the course of a delir-
ium and persist beyond the usual duration of intoxication and acute withdrawal.
C. The involved substance or medication and duration and extent of use are capable of
producing the neurocognitive impairment.
D. The temporal course of the neurocognitive deficits is consistent with the timing of sub-
stance or medication use and abstinence (e.g., the deficits remain stable or improve
after a period of abstinence).
628 Neurocognitive Disorders
E. The neurocognitive disorder is not attributable to another medical condition or is not
better explained by another mental disorder.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medica-
tion]-induced neurocognitive disorders are indi cated in the table below. Note that the ICD-
10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present
for the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the sub-
stance-induced neurocognitive disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician
should record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced neurocognitive
disorder (e.g., “mild inhalant use disorder wi th inhalant-induced major neurocognitive disor-
der”). If a moderate or severe  substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-
induced neurocognitive disorder, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should
record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending
on the severity of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance
use disorder, then the 4th position character is “9,” and the clinician should record only the
substance-induced neurocognitive disorder. For some classes of substances (i.e., alcohol;
sedatives, hypnotics, anxiolytics), it is not permissible to code a comorbid mild substance
use disorder with a substance-induced neurocog nitive disorder; only a comorbid moderate
or severe substance use disorder, or no substance use disorder, can be diagnosed. Behav-
ioral disturbance cannot be coded but should still be indicated in writing.
ICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CMWith use 
disorder, 
mildWith use 
disorder, 
moderate or 
severeWithout use 
disorder
Alcohol (major neurocognitive 
disorder), nonamnestic- 
confabulatory type291.2 NA F10.27 F10.97
Alcohol (major neurocognitive 
disorder), amnestic- 
confabulatory type291.1 NA F10.26 F10.96
Alcohol (mild neurocognitive 
disorder)291.89 NA F10.288 F10.988
Inhalant (major neurocognitive 
disorder)292.82 F18.17 F18.27 F18.97
Inhalant (mild neurocognitive 
disorder)292.89 F18.188 F18.288 F18.988
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic 
(major neurocognitive disorder)292.82 NA F13.27 F13.97
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic 
(mild neurocognitive disorder)292.89 NA F13.288 F13.988
Other (or unknown) substance 
(major neurocognitive disorder)292.82 F19.17 F19.27 F19.97
Other (or unknown) substance 
(mild neurocognitive disorder)292.89 F19.188 F19.288 F19.988
Substance/Medication-Induced Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder 629
Specify if: 
Persistent:  Neurocognitive impairment continues to be significant after an extended
period of abstinence.
Recording Procedures
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication-i nduced neurocogniti ve disorder be-
gins with the specific substance/medication (e.g ., alcohol) that is presumed to be causing
the neurocognitive symptoms. Th e diagnostic code is selected from the table included in
the criteria set, which is based on the drug clas s. For substances that do not fit into any of
the classes, the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance
is judged to be an etiological factor but the sp ecific class of substance is unknown, the cat-
egory “unknown substance” should be used.
The name of the disorder (i.e., [specific su bstance]-induced major neurocognitive dis-
order or [specific substance]-induced mild neurocognitive disorder) is followed by the
type in the case of alcohol (i.e., nonamnestic-confabulatory type, amnestic-confabulatory
type), followed by specification of duration (i .e., persistent). Unlike the recording procedures
for ICD-10-CM, which combine the substanc e/medication-induced disorder and sub-
stance use disorder into a single code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is given for
the substance use disorder. For example, in th e case of persistent amnestic-confabulatory
symptoms in a man with a severe alcohol use disorder, the diagnosis is 291.1 alcohol-
induced major neurocognitive d isorder, amnestic-confabulatory type, persistent. An addi-
tional diagnosis of 303.90 severe alcohol use diso rder is also given. If the substance/medi-
cation-induced neurocognitive disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder
(e.g., after a sporadic heavy use of inhalants) , no accompanying substance use disorder is
noted (e.g., 292.82 inhalant-induced mild neurocognitive disorder). 
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/medicati on-induced neurocognitive disorder
begins with the specific substance (e.g., alcoho l) that is presumed to be causing the neuro-
cognitive symptoms. The diagnostic code is sele cted from the table included in the criteria
set, which is based on the drug class and pres ence or absence of a comorbid substance use
disorder. For substances that do  not fit into any of the cla sses, the code for “other sub-
stance” should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological fac-
tor but the specific class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance”
should be used.
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substa nce use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the word “with,” followe d by the name of the disorder (i.e., [specific
substance]-induced major neurocognitive diso rder or [specific substance]-induced mild
neurocognitive disorder), follow ed by the type in the case of  alcohol (i.e., nonamnestic-con-
fabulatory type, amnestic-confabulatory type),  followed by specification of duration (i.e.,
persistent). For example, in the case of pers istent amnestic-confabulatory symptoms in a
man with a severe alcohol use disorder, the di agnosis is F10.26 severe alcohol use disorder
with alcohol-induced major neur ocognitive disorder, amnestic -confabulatory type, persis-
tent. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe  alcohol use disorder is not given. If the
substance-induced neurocognitive disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use dis-
order (e.g., after a sporadic heavy use of inha lants), no accompanying substance use disor-
der is noted (e.g., F18.98 8 inhalant-induced mild neurocognitive disorder).
Diagnostic Features 
Substance/medication-induced major or mild  NCD is characterized by neurocognitive
impairments that persist beyond the usual du ration of intoxication and acute withdrawal
(Criterion B). Initially, these manifestations can reflect slow recovery of brain functions
from a period of prolonged su bstance use, and improvements in neurocognitive as well as
630 Neurocognitive Disorders
brain imaging indicators may be seen over ma ny months. If the diso rder continues for an
extended period, persistent  should be specified. The give n substance and its use must be
known to be capable of causing the observed impairments (Criterion C). While nonspecific
decrements in a range of cognitive abilities can occur with nearly any substance of abuse
and a variety of medications, some patterns occur more frequently  with selected drug
classes. For example, NCD due to sedative, hypno tic, or anxiolytic drugs (e.g., benzodiaz-
epines, barbiturates) ma y show greater disturbances in memory than in other cognitive
functions. NCD induced by alcohol frequently  manifests with a co mbination of impair-
ments in executive-function and memory and learning domains. Th e temporal course of
the substance-induced NCD must be consistent  with that of use of the given substance
(Criterion D). In alcohol-induced amnestic confabulatory (Korsakoff ’s) NCD, the features
include prominent amnesia (severe difficulty learning new information with rapid forget-
ting) and a tendency to confabulate. These ma nifestations may co-occur with signs of thi-
amine encephalopathy (Wernicke’s encephalopathy) with associated features such as
nystagmus and ataxia. Ophthalmoplegia of Wernicke’s encephalopathy is typically charac-
terized by a lateral gaze paralysis.
In addition to or independent of the mo re common neurocognitive symptoms related
to methamphetamine use (e.g., difficulties wi th learning and memory; executive func-
tion), methamphetamine use can also be associat ed with evidence of vascular injury (e.g.,
focal weakness, unilateral incoordination, as ymmetrical reflexes). The most common neu-
rocognitive profile approximates that seen in vascular NCD. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Intermediate-duration NC D induced by drugs with central nervous system depressant effects
may manifest with added symptoms of increased irritability, anxiety, sleep disturbance, and
dysphoria. Intermediate-duration NCD induced by stimulant drugs may manifest with re-
bound depression, hypersomnia, and apathy. In severe forms of substance/medication-
induced major NCD (e.g., associ ated with long-term alcohol use), there may be prominent
neuromotor features, such as incoordination, ataxia, and motor slowing. There may also be
loss of emotional control, including aggres sive or inappropriat e affect, or apathy.
Prevalence
The prevalence of these conditions is not know n. Prevalence figures for substance abuse are
available, and substance/medica tion-induced major or mild NCDs are more likely in those
who are older, have longer use, and have other risk factors such as nutritional deficits.
For alcohol abuse, the rate of mild NCD of intermediate duration is approximately 30%–
40% in the first 2 months of abstinence. Mild NCD may persist, particularly in those who do
not achieve stable abstinence until after age 50 years. Major NCD is rare and may result from
concomitant nutritional deficits, as in al cohol-induced amnestic  confabulatory NCD.
For individuals quitting cocaine, metham phetamine, opioids, phencyclidine, and sed-
ative, hypnotics, or anxiolytics, substance/medication-induced mild NCD of intermediate
duration may occur in one-third or more, and there is some evidence that these substances
may also be associated with persistent mild  NCD. Major NCD associated with these sub-
stances is rare, if it occurs at  all. In the case of methamph etamine, cerebr ovascular disease
can also occur, resulting in diffuse or focal brain injury that  can be of mild or major neu-
rocognitive levels. Solvent expo sure has been linked to both major and mild NCD of both
intermediate and persistent duration. 
The presence of NCD induced by cannabis and various hallucinogens is controversial.
With cannabis, intoxication is  accompanied by various neur ocognitive disturbances, but
these tend to clear with abstinence. 
Substance/Medication-Induced Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder 631
Development and Course
Substance use disorders tend to commence du ring adolescence and peak in the 20s and
30s. Although longer history of severe substa nce use disorder is associated with greater
likelihood of NCD, the relationships are not straightforward, with substantial and even
complete recovery of neurocognitive func tions being common among individuals who
achieve stable abstinence prior to age 50 ye ars. Substance/medication-induced major or
mild NCD is most likely to become persistent in individuals who continue abuse of sub-
stances past age 50 years, presumably becaus e of a combination of lessened neural plas-
ticity and beginnings of other age-related br ain changes. Earlier commencement of abuse,
particularly of alcohol, may lead to defects in later neural development (e.g., later stages of
maturation of frontal circuitries), which may have effects on social cognition as well as
other neurocognitive abilities.  For alcohol-induced NCD, there may be an additive effect
of aging and alcohol-induced brain injury.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk factors for substance/medication-induced  NCDs include older age, longer use, and
persistent use past age 50 years. In additi on, for alcohol-induced NCD, long-term nutri-
tional deficiencies, liver disease, vascular r isk factors, and cardiovascular and cerebrovas-
cular disease may contribute to risk. 
Diagnostic Markers
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of individuals with chronic alcohol abuse frequently
reveals cortical thinning, white matter loss, and enlargement of sulci and ventricles. While
neuroimaging abnormalities are more common in  those with NCDs, it is possible to ob-
serve NCDs without neuroimaging abnormalitie s, and vice versa. Specialized techniques
(e.g., diffusion tensor imaging) may reveal damage to specific white matter tracts. Mag-
netic resonance spectroscopy may reveal reduction in N-acetylaspartate, and increase in
markers of inflammation (e.g., myoinositol) or white matter injury (e.g., choline). Many of
these brain imaging changes and neurocogniti ve manifestations reverse following suc-
cessful abstinence. In individuals with meth amphetamine use disorder, MRI may also re-
veal hyperintensities suggestive of microhem orrhages or larger areas of infarction.
Functional Consequences of Substance/Medication-
Induced Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
The functional consequences of substance/ medication-induced mild NCD are sometimes
augmented by reduced cognitive efficiency an d difficulty concentrating beyond that seen
in many other NCDs. In addition, at both major and mild levels, substance/medication-
induced NCDs may have associated motor syndro mes that increase the level of functional
impairment. 
Differential Diagnosis
Individuals with substance use disorders, substance intoxica tion, and substance withdrawal
are at increased risk for othe r conditions that may independently, or through a compounding
effect, result in neurocognitive  disturbance. These include hi story of traumatic brain injury
and infections that can accompany substance use disorder (e.g., HIV, hepatitis C virus, syph-
ilis). Therefore, presence of substance/medi cation-induced major or mild NCD should be
differentiated from NCDs arising outside the co ntext of substance use, intoxication, and with-
drawal, including these accompanying cond itions (e.g., traumatic brain injury).
632 Neurocognitive Disorders
Comorbidity
Substance use disorders, substance intoxicati on, and substance withdrawal are highly co-
morbid with other mental disorders. Comorb id posttraumatic stre ss disorder, psychotic
disorders, depressive and bi polar disorders, and neurodev elopmental disorders can con-
tribute to neurocognitive impairment in substance users. Traumatic brain injury occurs
more frequently with substance use, complicati ng efforts to determine the etiology of NCD
in such cases. Severe, long-term alcohol use disorder can be associated with major organ
system disease, including cerebrovascular disease and cirrhosis. Amphetamine-induced
NCD may be accompanied by major or mild vascular NCD, also secondary to amphet-
amine use.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
 Due to HIV Infection
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is documented infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
C. The neurocognitive disorder is not bette r explained by non-HIV conditions, including
secondary brain diseases such as progre ssive multifocal leukoencephalopathy or
cryptococcal meningitis.
D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attribut able to another medical condition and is not
better explained by a mental disorder.
Coding note: For major neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection, with behavioral dis-
turbance, code first 042 (B20)  HIV infection, followed by 294.11 (F02.81)  major neurocog-
nitive disorder due to HIV infection, with behavioral disturbance. For major neurocognitive
disorder due to HIV infection, without behavioral disturbance, code first 042 (B20)  HIV in-
fection, followed by 294.10 (F02.80)  major neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection,
without behavioral disturbance.
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection, code 331.83 (G31.84).  (Note:  Do
not use the additional code for HIV infection. Behavioral disturbance cannot be coded but
should still be indicated in writing.)
Diagnostic Features 
HIV disease is caused by infection with hu man immunodeficiency virus type-1 (HIV-1),
which is acquired through exposure to bodily fluids of an infected person through injection
drug use, unprotected sexual contact, or acci dental or iatrogenic exposure (e.g., contami-
nated blood supply, needle puncture injury to medical personnel). HIV infects several types
of cells, most particularly immune cells. Over time, the infection can cause severe depletion
of “T-helper” (CD4) lymphocytes, resulting in severe immunocompromise, often leading to
opportunistic infections and neoplasms. This  advanced form of HIV infection is termed
acquired immune deficiency syndrome  (AIDS). Diagnosis of HIV is confirmed by established
laboratory methods such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for HIV antibody with
Western blot confirmation and/or polymera se chain reaction–based assays for HIV. 
Some individuals with HIV infection deve lop an NCD, which generally shows a “sub-
cortical pattern” with prominently impaired executive function, slowing of processing
speed, problems with more demanding attentio nal tasks, and difficulty in learning new
information, but fewer problems with recall of  learned information. In major NCD, slow-
ing may be prominent. Language difficulties , such as aphasia, are uncommon, although
reductions in fluency may be observed. HIV pathogenic proc esses can affect any part of
the brain; therefore, other patterns are possible. 
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to HIV Infection 633
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Major or mild NCD due to HIV infection is usually more prevalent in individuals with
prior episodes of severe immunosuppression, high viral loads in the cerebrospinal fluid,
and indicators of advanced HIV disease such as anemia and hypoalbuminemia. Individ-
uals with advanced NCD may experience prom inent neuromotor features such as severe
incoordination, ataxia, and moto r slowing. There may be loss of emotional control, includ-
ing aggressive or inappropriate affect or apathy. 
Prevalence
Depending on stage of HIV disease, approx imately one-third to over one-half of HIV-
infected individuals have at least mild neuroc ognitive disturbance, but some of these dis-
turbances may not meet the full criteria for mild NCD. An estimated 25% of individuals
with HIV will have signs and symptoms that meet criteria for mild NCD, and in fewer than
5% would criteria for major NCD be met. 
Development and Course 
An NCD due to HIV infection can resolve, improve, slowly worsen, or have a fluctuating
course. Rapid progression to profound neur ocognitive impairment is uncommon in the
context of currently available combination antiviral treatment; co nsequently, an abrupt
change in mental status in an individual with HIV may prompt an evaluation of other
medical sources for the cognitive change, incl uding secondary infections. Because HIV in-
fection preferentially affects subcortical regi ons over the course of  illness, including deep
white matter, the progression of the disorder follows a “subcortical ” pattern. Since HIV
can affect a variety of brain regions, and the illness can take on many different trajectories
depending on associated comorbidities and cons equences of HIV, the overall course of an
NCD due to HIV infection has considerable heterogeneity. A subc ortical neurocognitive
profile may interact with age over the life course, when psychomo tor slowing and motor
impairments such as slowed gait may occur as a consequence of other age-related condi-
tions so that the overall progression ma y appear more pronounced in later life. 
In developed countries, HIV disease is primar ily a condition of adults, with acquisition
via risky behaviors (e.g., unprotected sex, inje ction drug use) beginning in late adolescence
and peaking during young and middle adulth ood. In developing countries, particularly
sub-Saharan Africa, where HIV testing and an tiretroviral treatments for pregnant women
are not readily available, perinatal transmis sion is common. The NCD in such infants and
children may present primarily as neurodevelopment al delay. As individuals treated for
HIV survive into older age, additive and in teractive neurocognitive effects of HIV and
aging, including other NCDs (e .g., due to Alzheimer’s dise ase, due to Parkinson’s dis-
ease), are possible. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk and prognostic factors for HIV infection. Risk factors for HIV infection include injec-
tion drug use, unprotected sex, and unprotecte d blood supply and othe r iatrogenic factors. 
Risk and prognostic factors for major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to HIV in-
fection. Paradoxically, NCD due to HIV infection ha s not declined significantly with the
advent of combined antiretrov iral therapy, although the most  severe presentations (con-
sistent with the diagnosis of major NCD) ha ve decreased sharply. Contributory factors
may include inadequate control of HIV in the central nervous system (CNS), the evolution
of drug-resistant viral strains, the effects of  chronic long-term systemic and brain inflam-
mation, and the effects of comorb id factors such as aging, drug  abuse, past history of CNS
trauma, and co-infections, such as with the hepatitis C virus. Chronic exposure to antiret-
roviral drugs also raises the po ssibility of neurotoxicity, alth ough this has not been defin-
itively established. 
634 Neurocognitive Disorders
Diagnostic Markers
Serum HIV testing is required for the diagnosis.  In addition, HIV charac terization of the cere-
brospinal fluid may be helpful if it reveals a disp roportionately high viral load in cerebrospinal
fluid versus in the plasma. Neuroimaging (i.e.,  magnetic resonance im aging [MRI]) may reveal
reduction in total brain volume, cortical thi nning, reduction in white matter volume, and
patchy areas of abnormal white matter (hyper intensities). MRI or lumbar puncture may be
helpful to exclude a specific medical condition such as cryptococcus infection or herpes en-
cephalitis that may contribute to CNS changes in the context of AIDS. Specialized techniques
such as diffusion tensor imaging may reveal  damage to specific white matter tracts. 
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild 
Neurocognitive Disorder  Due to HIV Infection
Functional consequences of ma jor or mild NCD due to HIV infection are variable across
individuals. Thus, impaired executive abiliti es and slowed information processing may
substantially interfere with the complex dise ase management decisions required for ad-
herence to the combined antire troviral therapy regimen. The likelihood of comorbid dis-
ease may further create functional challenges. 
Differential Diagnosis
In the presence of comorbidities, such as other infections (e.g., hepati tis C virus, syphilis),
drug abuse (e.g., methamphetamine abuse), or  prior head injury or neurodevelopmental
conditions, major or mild NCD due to HIV infe ction can be diagnosed provided there is ev-
idence that infection with HIV has worsened any NCDs due to such preexisting or comorbid
conditions. Among older adults, onset of neur ocognitive decline rela ted to cerebrovascular
disease or neurodegeneration (e.g., major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease) may
need to be differentiated. In general, stable, fluctuating (without progression) or improving
neurocognitive status would favor an HIV et iology, whereas steady or stepwise deter-
ioration would suggest neurodeg enerative or vascular etiolo gy. Because more severe im-
munodeficiency can result in opportunistic in fections of the brain (e.g., toxoplasmosis;
cryptococcosis) and neoplasia (e.g., CNS lymphoma), sudden onset of an NCD or sudden
worsening of that disorder demands acti ve investigation of non-HIV etiologies.
Comorbidity
HIV disease is accompanied by chronic systemic  and neuro-inflammation that can be as-
sociated with cerebrovascular disease and metabolic syndrome. These complications can
be part of the pathogenesis of major or mild NCD due to HIV infectio n. HIV frequently co-
occurs with conditions such as substance use disorders when the substance has been in-
jected and other sexually  transmitted disorders. 
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
 Due to Prion Disease
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is insidious onset, and rapid progression of impairment is common.
C. There are motor features of prion disease, such as myoclonus or ataxia, or biomarker
evidence.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Prion Disease 635
D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attribut able to another medical condition and is not
better explained by another mental disorder.
Coding note:  For major neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease, with behavioral dis-
turbance, code first 046.79 (A81.9)  prion disease, followed by 294.11 (F02.81)  major
neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease,  with behavioral disturbance. For major neu-
rocognitive disorder due to prion disease, without behavioral disturbance, code first
046.79 (A81.9)  prion disease, followed by 294.10 (F02.80)  major neurocognitive disorder
due to prion disease, without behavioral disturbance.
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease, code 331.83 (G31.84).  (Note:  Do
not use the additional code for prion disease. Behavioral disturbance cannot be coded but
should still be indicated in writing.)
Diagnostic Features
The classification of major or mild neurocogni tive disorder (NCD) due to prion disease in-
cludes NCDs due to a group of subacute sp ongiform encephalopathies (including Creutz-
feldt-Jakob disease, variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, kuru, Gerstmann-Sträussler-
Scheinker syndrome, and fatal insomnia) ca used by transmissible agents known as prions.
The most common type is sporadic Creutzfeld t-Jakob disease, typically referred to as
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). Variant CJD is  much rarer and is associated with trans-
mission of bovine spongiform encephalopathy,  also called “mad cow disease.” Typically,
individuals with CJD present with neurocognitive deficits , ataxia, and abnormal move-
ments such as myoclonus, chorea, or dystonia; a startle reflex is also common. Typically,
the history reveals rapid progression to major NCD over as little as 6 months, and thus the
disorder is typically seen only at the major le vel. However, many individuals with the dis-
order may have atypical presentations, and the disease can be confirmed only by biopsy or
at autopsy. Individuals with variant CJD may present with a greater preponderance of
psychiatric symptoms, characterized a by lo w mood, withdrawal, and anxiety. Prion dis-
ease is typically not diagnosed without at le ast one of the characteristic biomarker fea-
tures: recognized lesions on magnetic resonance imaging with DWI (diffusion-weighted
imaging) or FLAIR (flu id-attenuated inversion recovery), tau or 14-3-3 protein in cerebro-
spinal fluid, characteristic triphasic waves on electroencephalogram, or, for rare familial
forms, family history or genetic testing. 
Prevalence
The annual incidence of sporadic CJD is a pproximately one or two cases per million peo-
ple. Prevalence is unknown but ve ry low given the short survival.
Development and Course
Prion disease may develop at any age in adults—the peak age for the sporadic CJD is ap-
proximately 67 years—although it has been report ed to occur in individuals spanning the
teenage years to late life. Prodromal symptoms  of prion disease may include fatigue, anx-
iety, problems with appetite or sleeping, or difficulties with concentration. After several
weeks, these symptoms may be followed by incoordination, altered vision, or abnormal
gait or other movements that may be myoclonic,  choreoathetoid, or ballistic, along with a
rapidly progressive dementia. The disease typi cally progresses very rapidly to the major
level of impairment over several months. More rarely, it can progress over 2 years and ap-
pear similar in its course to other NCDs.
636 Neurocognitive Disorders
Risk Factors and Prognosis
Environmental. Cross-species transmission  of prion infections, with agents that are
closely related to the human form, has been demonstrated (e.g., the outbreak of bovine
spongiform encephalopathy inducing variant CJD in the United Kingdom during the mid-
1990s). Transmission by corneal transplantation and by human growth factor injection has
been documented, and anecdotal cases of tran smission to health care workers have been
reported.
Genetic and physiological. There is a genetic component in up to 15% of cases, associ-
ated with an autosoma l dominant mutation.
Diagnostic Markers
Prion disease can be definitively confirmed only by biopsy or at autopsy. Although there are
no distinctive findings on cerebrospinal fluid analysis across the prion diseases, reliable bio-
markers are being developed and include 14-3-3 protein (particularly for sporadic CJD) as
well as tau protein. Magnetic resonance brain imaging is currently considered the most sen-
sitive diagnostic test when DWI is performed, with the most common finding being multi-
focal gray matter hyperintensities in subcortical and cortical regions. In some individuals,
the electroencephalogram reve als periodic sharp, often triphasic and synchronous dis-
charges at a rate of 0.5–2 Hz at some point during the course of the disorder. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other major neurocognitive disorders. Major NCD due to prion disease may appear
similar in its course to other NCDs, but prio n diseases are typically distinguished by their
rapid progression and prominent cerebellar and motor symptoms.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
Due to Parkinson’s Disease
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. The disturbance occurs in the setting of established Parkinson’s disease.
C. There is insidious onset and gradual progression of impairment.
D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attribut able to another medical condition and is not
better explained by another mental disorder.
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder  probably due to Parkinson’s disease  should
be diagnosed if 1 and 2 are both met. Major or mild neurocognitive disorder possibly
due to Parkinson’s disease should be diagnosed if 1 or 2 is met:
1. There is no evidence of mixed etiology (i.e., absence of other neurodegenerative or
cerebrovascular disease or another neurological, mental, or systemic disease or con-
dition likely contributing to cognitive decline).
2. The Parkinson’s disease clearly precedes the onset of the neurocognitive disorder.
Coding note: For major neurocognitive disorder probably due to Parkinson’s disease,
with behavioral disturbance, code first 332.0 (G20)  Parkinson’s disease, followed by
294.11 (F02.81)  major neurocognitive disorder probably due to Parkinson’s disease, with
behavioral disturbance. For major neurocognitive disorder probably due to Parkinson’s
disease, without behavioral disturbance, code first 332.0 (G20)  Parkinson’s disease, fol-
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Parkinson’s Disease 637
lowed by 294.10 (F02.80)  major neurocognitive disorder probably due to Parkinson’s dis-
ease, without behavioral disturbance.
For major neurocognitive disorder possibly due to Parkinson’s disease, code 331.9
(G31.9)  major neurocognitive disorder possibly due to Parkinson’s disease. ( Note:  Do not
use the additional code for Parkinson’s disease. Behavioral disturbance cannot be coded
but should still be indicated in writing.)
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease, code 331.83 (G31.84).
(Note:  Do not  use the additional code for Parkinson’s disease. Behavioral disturbance
cannot be coded but should still be indicated in writing.)
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of major or mild neurocognitive disorder (NCD) due to Parkinson’s
disease is cognitive decline following the onset of Parkinson’s disease. The disturbance
must occur in the setting of established Parkinson’s disease (Criterion B), and deficits must
have developed gradually (Criterion C). The NCD is viewed as probably due to Parkinson’s
disease when there is no evidence of another disorder that might be contributing to the
cognitive decline and when the Parkinson’s disease clearly precedes onset of the NCD. The
NCD is considered possibly due to Parkinson’s disease either  when there is no evidence of
another disorder that might be contributing to the cognitive decline or when the Parkin-
son’s disease precedes onset of the NCD, but not both.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Frequently present features include apathy , depressed mood, anxious mood, hallucina-
tions, delusions, personality changes, rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, and
excessive daytime sleepiness. 
Prevalence 
The prevalence of Parkinson’s disease in the United States steadily increases with age from
approximately 0.5% between ages 65 and 69 to  3% at age 85 years and older. Parkinson’s
disease is more common in males than in females. Among individuals with Parkinson’s
disease, as many as 75% will develop a major NC D sometime in the course of their disease.
The prevalence of mild NCD in Parkinso n’s disease has been estimated at 27%. 
Development and Course
Onset of Parkinson’s disease is typically betw een the sixth and ninth decades of life, with
most expression in the early 60s. Mild NCD ofte n develops relatively early in the course of
Parkinson’s disease, whereas major impairme nt typically does not occur until late. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Risk factors for Parkinson’s disease include exposure to herbicides and
pesticides.
Genetic and physiological. Potential risk factors for NC D among individuals with Par-
kinson’s disease include older age at diseas e onset and increasing duration of disease. 
Diagnostic Markers
Neuropsychological testing, with a focus on test s that do not rely on motor function, is crit-
ical in detecting the core cogn itive deficits, particularly at the mild NCD phase. Structural
neuroimaging and dopamine transporter scans, such as DaT scans, may differentiate
Lewy body–related dementias (Parkinson’s and dementia wi th Lewy bodies) from non–
638 Neurocognitive Disorders
Lewy body–related dementias (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) and can sometimes be helpful in
the evaluation of major or mild  NCD due to Parkinson’s disease.
Differential Diagnosis
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies. This distinction is based sub-
stantially on the timing and sequence of mo tor and cognitive symptoms. For NCD to be at-
tributed to Parkinson’s diseas e, the motor and other symptoms  of Parkinson’s disease must
be present well before (by convention, at leas t 1 year prior) cognit ive decline has reached
the level of major NCD, whereas in major or mild NCD with Lewy bodies, cognitive symp-
toms begin shortly before, or concurrent wi th, motor symptoms. For mild NCD, the timing
is harder to establish because the diagnosis itse lf is less clear and th e two disorders exist on
a continuum. Unless Parkinson’s disease has been established for some time prior to the
onset of cognitive decline, or typical features  of major or mild NCD with Lewy bodies are
present, it is preferable to diagnose unspecified mild NCD.
Major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease. The motor features
are the key to distinguishing major or mild NCD due to Parkinson’s disease from major or
mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease. However, the two disorders can co-occur.
Major or mild vascular neurocognitive disorder. Major or mild vascular NCD may pre-
sent with parkinsonian features such as psychomotor slowing that may occur as a conse-
quence of subcortical small vessel disease. However, the parkinsonian features typically
are not sufficient for a diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease, and the course of the NCD usually
has a clear association with cerebrovascular changes.
Neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition (e.g., neurodegenerative
disorders). When a diagnosis of major or mild NC D due to Parkinson’s disease is being
considered, the distinction must also be made from other brain diso rders, such as progres-
sive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, multiple system atrophy, tumors, and
hydrocephalus. 
Neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism. Neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism can occur in
individuals with other NCDs, particularly when dopamine-blocking drugs are prescribed
for the behavioral manifest ations of such disorders
Other medical conditions. Delirium and NCDs due to side effects of dopamine-blocking
drugs and other medical conditio ns (e.g., sedation or impair ed cognition, severe hypothy-
roidism, B12 deficiency) must al so be ruled out. 
Comorbidity 
Parkinson’s disease may coexist with Alzheimer’ s disease and cerebrovascular disease, espe-
cially in older individuals. The compounding of  multiple pathological features may diminish
the functional abilities of individuals with Pa rkinson’s disease. Moto r symptoms and frequent
co-occurrence of depression or apathy can make functional impairment worse.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
 Due to Huntington’s Disease
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is insidious onset and gradual progression.
C. There is clinically established Huntington’ s disease, or risk for Huntington’s disease
based on family history or genetic testing.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Huntington’s Disease 639
D. The neurocognitive disorder is not attribut able to another medical condition and is not
better explained by another mental disorder.
Coding note:  For major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, with behav-
ioral disturbance, code first 333.4 (G10)  Huntington’s disease, followed by 294.11
(F02.81)  major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, with behavioral dis-
turbance. For major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, without behav-
ioral disturbance, code first 333.4 (G10)  Huntington’s disease, followed by 294.10 (F02.80)
major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, without behavioral disturbance.
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, code 331.83 (G31.84).
(Note:  Do not use the additional code for Huntington’s disease. Behavioral disturbance
cannot be coded but should still be indicated in writing.)
Diagnostic Features
Progressive cognitive impairment is a core feature of Huntington ’s disease, with early changes
in executive function (i.e., processing speed, organization, and planni ng) rather than learn-
ing and memory. Cognitive and associated beha vioral changes often precede the emergence
of the typical motor abnormalities of bradykinesia (i.e., slowing of voluntary movement)
and chorea (i.e., involuntary jerking movements). A diagnosis of definite Huntington’s dis-
ease is given in the presence of unequivocal,  extrapyramidal motor ab normalities in an in-
dividual with either a family history of Huntington’s disease or genetic testing showing a
CAG trinucleotide repeat expansion in the HTT gene, located on chromosome 4.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Depression, irritability, anxiety, obsessive -compulsive symptoms, and apathy are fre-
quently, and psychosis more rarely, associat ed with Huntington’s disease and often pre-
cede the onset of motor symptoms.
Prevalence
Neurocognitive deficits are an eventual ou tcome of Huntington’s disease; the worldwide
prevalence is estimated to be 2.7 per 100,000.  The prevalence of Huntington’s disease in
North America, Europe, and Australia is 5.7 pe r 100,000, with a much lower prevalence of
0.40 per 100,000 in Asia. 
Development and Course
The average age at diagnosis of Huntington’s disease is approximately 40 years, although
this varies widely. Age at onset is inversely correlated with CAG expansion length. Juve-
nile Huntington’s disease (ons et before age 20) may present more commonly with brady-
kinesia, dystonia, and rigidity than with the choreic movements characteristic of the adult-
onset disorder. The disease is gradually progre ssive, with median survival approximately
15 years after motor symptom diagnosis.
Phenotypic expression of Huntington’s diseas e varies by presence of motor, cognitive,
and psychiatric symptoms. Psychiatric and co gnitive abnormalities can predate the motor
abnormality by at least 15 years. Initial symp toms requiring care often include irritabity,
anxiety, or depressed mood. Other behavioral  disturbances may include pronounced ap-
athy, disinhibition, impulsivit y, and impaired insight, with apathy often becoming more
progressive over time. Early movement symptoms may involve the appearance of fidget-
iness of the extremitie s as well as mild apraxia  (i.e., difficulty with purposeful movements),
particularly with fine motor tasks. As the disorder progre sses, other motor problems in-
clude impaired gait (ataxia ) and postural instability. Motor impairment eventually affects
speech production ( dysarthria ) such that the speech becomes very difficult to understand,
640 Neurocognitive Disorders
which may result in significant distress resu lting from the communication barrier in the
context of comparatively intact cognition. Advanced motor disease severely affects gait
with progressive ataxia. Eventually individuals become nonambulatory. End-stage motor
disease impairs motor control of eating and swallowing, typically a major contributor to
the death of the individual from aspiration pneumonia.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Genetic and physiological. The genetic basis of Huntington’s disease is a fully penetrant
autosomal dominant expansion of th e CAG trincleotide, often called a CAG repeat  in the
huntingtin gene. A repeat length of 36 or more  is invariably associated with Huntington’s
disease, with longer repeat lengths associated  with early age at onset. A CAG repeat length
of 36 or more is invariably asso ciated with Huntington’s disease.
Diagnostic Markers
Genetic testing is the primary laboratory test  for the determination of Huntington’s dis-
ease, which is an autosomal dominant disord er with complete penetrance. The trinucleo-
tide CAG is observed to have a repeat ex pansion in the gene that encodes huntingtin
protein on chromosome 4. A di agnosis of Huntington’s disease is not made in the presence
of the gene expansion alone, but the diagno sis is made only after symptoms become man-
ifest. Some individuals with a positive family  history request genetic testing in a presymp-
tomatic stage. Associat ed features may also include neur oimaging changes; volume loss in
the basal ganglia, particularly the caudate nu cleus and putamen, is well known to occur
and progresses over the course of illness. Other structural and functional changes have
been observed in brain imagin g but remain research measures.
Functional Consequences of Major or Mild 
Neurocognitive Disorder Du e to Huntington’s Disease
In the prodromal phase of illness and at early diagnosis, occupational decline is most com-
mon, with most individuals repo rting some loss of ability to engage in their typical work.
The emotional, behavioral, and cognitive aspects of Huntington’s disease, such as disin-
hibition and personality changes, are highly associated with functional decline. Cognitive
deficits that contribute most to functional decline may incl ude speed of processing, initi-
ation, and attention rather th an memory impairment. Given that Huntington’s disease on-
set occurs in productive years of life, it may have a very disruptive effect on performance
in the work setting as well as social and fam ily life. As the disease progresses, disability
from problems such as impair ed gait, dysarthria, and impulsive or irritable behaviors may
substantially add to the level of impairment and daily care needs, over and above the care
needs attributable to the cognitive decline.  Severe choreic moveme nts may substantially
interfere with provision of care such  as bathing, dressing, and toileting.
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders. Early symptoms of Huntington’s disease may include instabil-
ity of mood, irritability, or compulsive behaviors that may suggest another mental disor-
der. However, genetic testing or the develo pment of motor symptoms  will distinguish the
presence of Huntington’s disease.
Other neurocognitive disorders. The early symptoms of Huntington’s disease, particu-
larly symptoms of executive dysfunction an d impaired psychomotor speed, may resemble
other neurocognitive disorders (NCDs), such as major or mild vascular NCD.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 641
Other movement disorders. Huntington’s disease must also be differentiated from other
disorders or conditions associated with chorea, such as Wilson’s disease, drug-induced
tardive dyskinesia, Sydenham’s chorea, systemic  lupus erythematosus, or senile chorea.
Rarely, individuals may present with a course similar to that of Huntington’s disease but
without positive genetic testin g; this is considered to be  a Huntington’s disease pheno-
copy that results from a variet y of potential genetic factors.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
 Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
neurocognitive disorder is the pathophysi ological consequence of another medical
condition. 
C. The cognitive deficits are not better explained by another mental disorder or another
specific neurocognitive disorder (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease, HIV infection).
Coding note: For major neurocognitive disorder due  to another medical condition, with
behavioral disturbance, code first the other medical condition, followed by the major neu-
rocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, with behavioral disturbance (e.g.,
340 [G35] multiple sclerosis, 294.11 [F02.81]  major neurocognitive disorder due to multi-
ple sclerosis, with behavioral disturbance). For major neurocognitive disorder due to an-
other medical condition, without behavioral disturbance, code first the other medical
condition, followed by the major neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition,
without behavioral disturbance (e.g., 340 [G35] multiple sclerosis, 294.10 [F02.80]  major
neurocognitive disorder due to multiple sclerosis, without behavioral disturbance).
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, code 331.83 (G31.84).
(Note:  Do not  use the additional code for the other medical condition. Behavioral distur-
bance cannot be coded but should still be indicated in writing.)
Diagnostic Features
A number of other medical co nditions can cause neurocognitive disorders (NCDs). These
conditions include structural lesions (e.g., primary or secondary brain tumors, subdural
hematoma, slowly progressive or normal-press ure hydrocephalus), hypoxia related to hy-
poperfusion from heart failure, endocrine co nditions (e.g., hypothyroidism, hypercalce-
mia, hypoglycemia), nutritional conditions (e.g., deficiencies of thiamine or niacin), other
infectious conditions (e.g., neurosyphilis, cryptococcosis), im mune disorders (e.g., tempo-
ral arteritis, systemic lupus erythematosus), hepatic or rena l failure, metabolic conditions
(e.g., Kufs’ disease, adrenoleukodystrophy, metachromatic leukodystrophy, other storage
diseases of adulthood and childhood), and ot her neurological conditions (e.g., epilepsy,
multiple sclerosis). Unusual causes of central nervous system injury, such as electrical
shock or intracranial radiation, are generally evident from the history. The temporal asso-
ciation between the onset or exacerbation of  the medical condition and the development of
the cognitive deficit offers the greatest supp ort that the NCD is induced by the medical
condition. Diagnostic certainty regarding this relationship may be increased if the neuro-
cognitive deficits ameliorate partially or stab ilize in the context of treatment of the medical
condition. 
642 Neurocognitive Disorders
Development and Course
Typically the course of the NCD progresses in a manner that is commensurate with progres-
sion of the underlying medical disorder. In ci rcumstances where the medical disorder is treat-
able (e.g., hypothyroidism), th e neurocognitive deficit may im prove or at least not progress.
When the medical condition has a deteriorative course (e.g., secondary progressive multiple
sclerosis), the neurocognitive deficits will progre ss along with the tempor al course of illness.
Diagnostic Markers
Associated physical examinatio n and laboratory findings and other clinical features de-
pend on the nature and severity of the medical condition. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other major or mild neurocognitive disorder. The presence of an attributable medical
condition does not entirely exclude the possibility of another major or mild NCD. If cog-
nitive deficits persist following successful treatment of an associated medical condition,
then another etiology may be responsible for the cognitive decline.
Major or Mild Neurocognitive Disorder
 Due to Multiple Etiologies
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. The criteria are met for major or mild neurocognitive disorder.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
neurocognitive disorder is the pathophysiological consequence of more than one etio-
logical process, excluding substances (e.g., neurocognitive disorder due to Alzhei-
mer’s disease with subsequent development of vascular neurocognitive disorder).
Note:  Please refer to the diagnostic criteria for the various neurocognitive disorders due
to specific medical conditions for guidance  on establishing the pa rticular etiologies. 
C. The cognitive deficits are not better ex plained by another mental disorder and do not
occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
Coding note: For major neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies, with behavioral
disturbance, code 294.11 (F02.81) ; for major neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiolo-
gies, without behavioral disturbance, code 294.10 (F02.80). All of the etiological medical
conditions (with the exception of  vascular disease) should be coded and listed separately
immediately before major neurocognitive diso rder due to multiple etiologies (e.g., 331.0
[G30.9]  Alzheimer’s disease; 331.82 [G31.83]  Lewy body disease; 294.11 [F02.81]  major
neurocognitive disorder due to multiple  etiologies, with behavioral disturbance).
When a cerebrovascular etiology is contributin g to the neurocognitive disorder, the diagno-
sis of vascular neurocognitive disorder should be listed in addition to major neurocognitive
disorder due to multiple etiologies. For example, for a presentation of major neurocognitive
disorder due to both Alzheimer’s disease and va scular disease, with behavioral disturbance,
code the following: 331.0 (G30.9) Alzheimer’s disease; 294.11 (F02.81)  major neurocogni-
tive disorder due to multiple etiologies, with behavioral disturbance; 290.40 (F01.51)  major
vascular neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance.
For mild neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies, code 331.83 (G31.84).  (Note:
Do not use the additional codes for the etiologies. Behavioral disturbance cannot be coded
but should still be indicated in writing.)
Unspecified Neurocognitive Disorder 643
This category is included to cover the clinical presentation of a neurocognitive disorder (NCD)
for which there is evidence that multiple medical conditions have played a probable role in the
development of the NCD. In addition to evidence indicative of the presence of multiple med-
ical conditions that are known to cause NCD (i .e., findings from the hi story and physical ex-
amination, and laboratory findings), it may be he lpful to refer to the diag nostic criteria and text
for the various medical etiologies (e.g., NCD du e to Parkinson’s disease) for more information
on establishing the etiological connection  for that particular medical condition.
Unspecified Neurocognitive Disorder
799.59 (R41.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a neurocogni-
tive disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any
of the disorders in the neurocognitive diso rders diagnostic class. The unspecified neuro-
cognitive disorder category is used in situations in which the precise etiology cannot be
determined with sufficient certainty to make an etiological attribution.
Coding note:  For unspecified major or mild neurocognitive disorder, code 799.59 (R41.9).
(Note:  Do not use additional codes for any presumed etiological medical conditions. Be-
havioral disturbance cannot be coded but may be indicated in writing.)
This page intentionally left blank 