235 Obsessive-Compulsive and
Related Disorders
Obsessive-compulsive  and related disorders in clude obsessive-compulsive
disorder (OCD), body dysmor phic disorder, hoarding diso rder, trichotillomania (hair-
pulling disorder), excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, substance/medication-induced ob-
sessive-compulsive and related disorder, obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due
to another medical condition, and other spec ified obsessive-compulsive and related dis-
order and unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (e.g ., body-focused re-
petitive behavior disorder, obsessional jealousy).
OCD is characterized by the presence of obsessions and/or compulsions. Obsessions
are recurrent and persistent th oughts, urges, or images that are experienced as intrusive
and unwanted, whereas compulsions  are repetitive behaviors or mental acts that an indi-
vidual feels driven to perform in response to  an obsession or according to rules that must
be applied rigidly. Some other obsessive-comp ulsive and related disorders are also char-
acterized by preoccupations and by repetitive behaviors or mental acts in response to the
preoccupations. Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders are characterized pri-
marily by recurrent body -focused repetitive behaviors (e.g.,  hair pulling, sk in picking) and
repeated attempts to decrease or stop the behaviors.
The inclusion of a chapter on  obsessive-compulsive and rela ted disorders in DSM-5 re-
flects the increasing evidence of these disorders’ relatedness to one an other in terms of a
range of diagnostic validators as well as the c linical utility of grouping these disorders in
the same chapter. Clinicians are encouraged to  screen for these cond itions in individuals
who present with one of them and be aware of overlaps between these conditions. At the
same time, there are important differences in  diagnostic validators and treatment ap-
proaches across these disorders. Moreover, there are close relationships between the anx-
iety disorders and some of the obsessive-compulsive and related disorders (e.g., OCD),
which is reflected in the sequence of DSM-5 chapters, with obsessive-compulsive and re-
lated disorders following anxiety disorders. 
The obsessive-compulsive and related diso rders differ from developmentally norma-
tive preoccupations and rituals by being exce ssive or persisting beyond developmentally
appropriate periods. The distinction between the presence of subclinical symptoms and a
clinical disorder requires assessment of a nu mber of factors, including the individual’s
level of distress and impa irment in functioning. 
The chapter begins with OCD. It then co vers body dysmorphic disorder and hoarding
disorder, which are characterized by cognit ive symptoms such as perceived defects or
flaws in physical appearance or the perceived need to save possessions, respectively. The
chapter then covers trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) and excoriation (skin-picking)
disorder, which are characterized by recurrent body-focused repetitive behaviors. Finally,
it covers substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive an d related disorder,
obsessive-compulsive and relate d disorder due to another me dical condition, and other
specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder and unspecified obsessive-compul-
sive and related disorder.
While the specific content of obsessions and compulsions varies among individuals,
certain symptom dimensions are common in OCD, including th ose of cleaning (contami-
nation obsessions and cleaning compulsions); symmetry (symmetry obsessions and repeat-
236 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
ing, ordering, and counting compulsions); fo rbidden or taboo thoug hts (e.g., aggressive,
sexual, and religious obsessions and related co mpulsions); and harm (e .g., fears of harm to
oneself or others and related checking comp ulsions). The tic-related specifier of OCD is
used when an individual has a curren t or past history of a tic disorder.
Body dysmorphic disorder is characterize d by preoccupation with one or more per-
ceived defects or flaws in physical appearance that are not observable or appear only slight
to others, and by repetitive  behaviors (e.g., mirror checking, excessive grooming, skin
picking, or reassurance seeking) or mental acts (e.g., comparing one’s appearance with that
of other people) in response to the appear ance concerns. The appearance preoccupations
are not better explained by concerns with body fat or weight in an individual with an eat-
ing disorder. Muscle dysmorphia is a form of body dysmorphic disord er that is character-
ized by the belief that one’s body build is too small or is insu fficiently muscular.
Hoarding disorder is characterized by persis tent difficulty discarding or parting with
possessions, regardless of their actual value, as a result of a strong perceived need to save
the items and to distress associated with disc arding them. Hoarding disorder differs from
normal collecting. For example, symptoms of hoarding disorder result in the accumula-
tion of a large number of possessions that co ngest and clutter active living areas to the ex-
tent that their intended use is substantially  compromised. The excessive acquisition form
of hoarding disorder, which characterizes most  but not all individuals with hoarding dis-
order, consists of excessive collecting, buying , or stealing of items that are not needed or
for which there is no available space.
Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) is characterized by recurrent pulling out of
one's hair resulting in hair loss, and repeated  attempts to decrease or stop hair pulling.
Excoriation (skin-picking) disord er is characterized by recurrent picking of one’s skin re-
sulting in skin lesions and repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking. The body-
focused repetitive behaviors that characterize  these two disorders are not triggered by ob-
sessions or preoccupations; however, they ma y be preceded or accompanied by various
emotional states, such as feelin gs of anxiety or boredom. They may also be preceded by an
increasing sense of tension or may lead to gr atification, pleasure, or  a sense of relief when
the hair is pulled out or the skin is picked. In dividuals with these disorders may have vary-
ing degrees of conscious awareness of the beha vior while engaging in it, with some indi-
viduals displaying more focused attention on  the behavior (with preceding tension and
subsequent relief) and other individuals displaying more automatic behavior (with the be-
haviors seeming to occur without full awareness).
Substance/medication-i nduced obsessive-compulsive an d related disorder consists of
symptoms that are due to substance intoxicati on or withdrawal or to a medication. Obses-
sive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medica l condition involves symptoms
characteristic of obsessive-comp ulsive and related disorders th at are the direct pathophysio-
logical consequence of a medical disorder. Othe r specified obsessive-compulsive and related
disorder and unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder consist of symptoms
that do not meet criteria for a specific obse ssive-compulsive and related disorder because of
atypical presentation or uncertain etiology; th ese categories are also used for other specific
syndromes that are not listed in Section II and when insufficient information is available to di-
agnose the presentation as another obsessive -compulsive and related disorder. Examples of
specific syndromes not listed in Section II, an d therefore diagnosed as other specified obses-
sive-compulsive and related disorder or as unspecified obsessive-co mpulsive and related
disorder include body-focused  repetitiv e behavior disord er and obsessional jealousy.
Obsessive-compulsive and relate d disorders that have a cognitive component have in-
sight as the basis for specifiers; in each of th ese disorders, insight ranges from “good or fair
insight” to “poor insight” to “absent insight/ delusional beliefs” with respect to disorder-
related beliefs. For individuals whose obsess ive-compulsive and related disorder symp-
toms warrant the “with absent insight/delu sional beliefs” specifier, these symptoms
should not be diagnosed as a psychotic disorder.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 237
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 300.3 (F42)
A. Presence of obsessions, compulsions, or both: 
Obsessions are defined by (1) and (2): 
1. Recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced, at some
time during the disturbance, as intrusive and unwanted, and that in most individuals
cause marked anxiety or distress.
2. The individual attempts to ignore or suppres s such thoughts, urges, or images, or to
neutralize them with some other thought or  action (i.e., by performing a compulsion). 
Compulsions are defined by (1) and (2): 
1. Repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand washing, ordering, checking) or mental acts (e.g.,
praying, counting, repeating words silently ) that the individual feels driven to per-
form in response to an obsession or according to rules that must be applied rigidly.
2. The behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing anxiety or dis-
tress, or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however, these behaviors or
mental acts are not connected in a realistic way with what they are designed to neu-
tralize or prevent, or are clearly excessive.
Note:  Young children may not be able to articulate the aims of these behaviors or
mental acts.
B. The obsessions or compulsions are time-consuming (e.g., take more than 1 hour per
day) or cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning. 
C. The obsessive-compulsive symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects
of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
D. The disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder
(e.g., excessive worries, as in generalized anxiety disorder; preoccupation with ap-
pearance, as in body dysmorphic disorder; difficulty discarding or parting with posses-
sions, as in hoarding disorder; hair pulling, as in trichotillomania [hair-pulling disorder];
skin picking, as in excoriation [skin-picking] disorder; stereotypies, as in stereotypic
movement disorder; ritualized eating behavior, as in eating disorders; preoccupation
with substances or gambling, as in substance-related and addictive disorders; preoc-
cupation with having an illness, as in illness anxiety disorder; sexual urges or fantasies,
as in paraphilic disorders; impulses, as in disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct dis-
orders; guilty ruminations, as in major depressive disorder; thought insertion or delu-
sional preoccupations, as in schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders; or
repetitive patterns of behavior, as in autism spectrum disorder). 
Specify if: 
With good or fair insight:  The individual recognizes that obsessive-compulsive dis-
order beliefs are definitely or probably not true or that they may or may not be true.
With poor insight:  The individual thinks obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs are
probably true.
With absent insight/delusional beliefs:  The individual is completely convinced that
obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs are true.
Specify if: 
Tic-related:  The individual has a current or past history of a tic disorder.
238 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
Specifiers
Many individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) have dysfunctional beliefs.
These beliefs can include an inflated sense of responsibility and the tendency to overesti-
mate threat; perfectionism and intolerance of uncertainty; an d over-importance of thoughts
(e.g., believing that having a fo rbidden thought is as bad as acting on it) and the need to
control thoughts. 
Individuals with OCD vary in the degree of insight they have about the accuracy of the
beliefs that underlie their obsessive-compulsive symptoms. Many individuals have good or
fair insight  (e.g., the individual believes that the house definitely will not, probably will not,
or may or may not burn down if the stove is not checked 30 times). Some have poor insight
(e.g., the individual believes that the house w ill probably burn down if the stove is not
checked 30 times), and a few (4% or less) have absent insight/delu sional beliefs  (e.g., the in-
dividual is convinced that the house will burn down if the stove is not checked 30 times).
Insight can vary within an individual over the course of the illness. Poorer insight has been
linked to worse long-term outcome.
Up to 30% of individuals with OCD have a lifetime tic disorder. This is most common
in males with onset of OCD in childhood. Thes e individuals tend to differ from those with-
out a history of tic disorders in the themes of their OCD sy mptoms, comorbidity, course,
and pattern of fam ilial transmission. 
Diagnostic Features
The characteristic symptoms of OCD are the pr esence of obsessions and compulsions (Cri-
terion A). Obsessions  are repetitive and persistent thoughts (e.g., of contamination), images
(e.g., of violent or horrific scenes), or urges (e.g., to stab someone) . Importantly, obsessions
are not pleasurable or experi enced as voluntary: they ar e intrusive and unwanted and
cause marked distress or anxiety in most indi viduals. The individual attempts to ignore or
suppress these obsessions (e.g., avoiding tri ggers or using thought suppression) or to neu-
tralize them with another thought or ac tion (e.g., performing a compulsion). Compulsions
(or rituals) are repetitive behaviors (e.g., washing, checking) or mental acts (e.g., counting,
repeating words silently) that the individual feels driven to perform in response to an
obsession or according to rules that must be  applied rigidly. Most individuals with OCD
have both obsessions and compulsions. Comp ulsions are typically performed in response
to an obsession (e.g., thoughts of contaminatio n leading to washing rituals or that some-
thing is incorrect leading to repeating rituals unt il it feels “just right”). The aim is to reduce
the distress triggered by obsessions or to pr event a feared event (e.g., becoming ill). How-
ever, these compulsions either are not connected in a realistic way to the feared event (e.g.,
arranging items symmetrically to prevent harm  to a loved one) or are clearly excessive
(e.g., showering for hours each day). Compulsions are not done for pleasure, although some
individuals experience relief from anxiety or distress. 
Criterion B emphasizes that obsessions and compulsions must be time-consuming (e.g.,
more than 1 hour per day) or cause clinically significant distress or impairment to warrant
a diagnosis of OCD. This criterion helps to distinguish the disorder from the occasional in-
trusive thoughts or repetitive behaviors that  are common in the general population (e.g.,
double-checking that a door is locked). The frequency and severity of obsessions and com-
pulsions vary across individuals with OCD (e.g., some have mild to moderate symptoms,
spending 1–3 hours per day obsessing or doin g compulsions, where as others have nearly
constant intrusive thoughts or comp ulsions that can be  incapacitating).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The specific content of obsessions and comp ulsions varies between individuals. However,
certain themes, or dimensions, are common, including those of cleaning (contamination
obsessions and cleaning compulsions); sy mmetry (symmetry obsess ions and repeating,
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 239
ordering, and counting compulsions); forbidden or taboo th oughts (e.g., aggressive, sexual,
or religious obsessions and related compulsions) ; and harm (e.g., fears of harm to oneself
or others and checking compulsions). Some individuals also  have difficulties discarding
and accumulate (hoard) object s as a consequence of typical obsessions and compulsions,
such as fears of harming othe rs. These themes occur across different cultures, are rela-
tively consistent over time in adults with th e disorder, and may be as sociated with differ-
ent neural substrates. Importantly, individu als often have symptoms  in more than one
dimension. 
Individuals with OCD experience a range of  affective responses when confronted with
situations that trigger obsessions and compul sions. For example, many individuals expe-
rience marked anxiety that can include recurren t panic attacks. Others report strong feel-
ings of disgust. While perfor ming compulsions, some individuals report a distressing
sense of “incompleteness” or uneasiness unt il things look, feel, or sound “just right.” 
It is common for individuals with the disorder to avoid people, places, and things that
trigger obsessions and compulsions. For example, individuals with contamination con-
cerns might avoid public situat ions (e.g., restaurants, public  restrooms) to reduce ex-
posure to feared contaminants; individuals with intrusive thoughts about causing harm
might avoid social interactions. 
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of OCD in the United St ates is 1.2%, with a similar prevalence in-
ternationally (1.1%–1.8%). Females are affected  at a slightly higher rate than males in
adulthood, although males are more commonly affected in childhood. 
Development and Course
In the United States, the mean age at onset of OCD is 19.5 years, and 25% of cases start by
age 14 years. Onset after age 35 years is unusual but does occur. Males have an earlier age
at onset than females: nearly 25% of males have onset before age 10 years. The onset of
symptoms is typically gradual; however,  acute onset has also been reported.
If OCD is untreated, the cour se is usually chronic, often with waxing and waning symp-
toms. Some individuals have an episodic course, and a minority have a deteriorating
course. Without treatment, remission rates in  adults are low (e.g., 20% for those reevalu-
ated 40 years later). Onset in childhood or adolescence can le ad to a lifetim e of OCD. How-
ever, 40% of individuals with onset of OCD in childhood or adolescence may experience
remission by early adulthood. The course of OCD is often complicated by the co-occurrence
of other disorders (see section “C omorbidity” for this disorder).
Compulsions are more easily diagnosed in  children than obsessions are because com-
pulsions are observable. However, most childr en have both obsessions and compulsions
(as do most adults). The pattern  of symptoms in adults can be stable over time, but it is
more variable in children. Some differences in the content of obsessions and compulsions
have been reported when children and adol escent samples have been compared with
adult samples. These differences likely refl ect content appropriate to different develop-
mental stages (e.g., higher rates of sexual an d religious obsessions in adolescents than in
children; higher rates of harm obsessions [e.g ., fears of catastrophic events, such as death
or illness to self or loved ones] in ch ildren and adolescents than in adults). 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Greater internalizing symptoms, hi gher negative emotionality, and
behavioral inhibition in childhood are possible temperamental risk factors. 
Environmental. Physical and sexual abuse in childho od and other stressful or traumatic
events have been associated with an increased risk for de veloping OCD. Some children
240 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
may develop the sudden onset of obsessive- compulsive symptoms, which has been asso-
ciated with different environmental factors,  including various infectious agents and a
post-infectious auto immune syndrome.
Genetic and physiological. The rate of OCD among first-degree relatives of adults with
OCD is approximately two times that among fi rst-degree relatives of those without the
disorder; however, among first-degree relatives of individuals with onset of OCD in child-
hood or adolescence, the rate is increased 10-fold. Familial transmission is due in part to
genetic factors (e.g., a concordance rate of 0.57  for monozygotic vs. 0.22  for dizygotic twins).
Dysfunction in the orbitofrontal cortex, anteri or cingulate cortex, and striatum have been
most strongly implicated.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
OCD occurs across the world. There is substant ial similarity across cultures in the gender
distribution, age at onset, and comorbidity of OCD. Moreover, around the globe, there is a
similar symptom structure in volving cleaning, symmetry, hoarding, taboo thoughts, or
fear of harm. However, regional variation in symptom expression exists, and cultural
factors may shape the content of obsessions and compulsions.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males have an earlier age at onset of OCD than females and are more likely to have co-
morbid tic disorders. Gender differences in the pattern of symptom dimensions have been
reported, with, for example, females more likel y to have symptoms in the cleaning dimen-
sion and males more likely to have symptoms in the forbidden thoughts and symmetry di-
mensions. Onset or exacerbation of OCD, as well as symptoms that can interfere with the
mother-infant relationship (e.g., aggressive ob sessions leading to avoidance of the infant),
have been reported in the peripartum period. 
Suicide Risk
Suicidal thoughts occur at some point in as many as about half of individuals with OCD.
Suicide attempts are also report ed in up to one-quarter of individuals with OCD; the pres-
ence of comorbid major depressiv e disorder increases the risk. 
Functional Consequences of 
Obsessive-Compu lsive Disorder
OCD is associated with reduced quality of life as  well as high levels of social and occupa-
tional impairment. Impairment occurs across many different domains of life and is asso-
ciated with symptom severity. Impairment can be caused by the time spent obsessing and
doing compulsions. Avoi dance of situations that can tr igger obsessions or compulsions
can also severely restrict functioning. In addition, specific sympto ms can create specific
obstacles. For example, obsessions about harm can make relationships with family and
friends feel hazardous; the result can be av oidance of these rela tionships. Obsessions
about symmetry can derail the timely completion of school or work projects because the
project never feels “just right,” potentially resulting in school failure or job loss. Health
consequences can also occur. For example, individuals with contamination concerns may
avoid doctors’ offices and hospit als (e.g., because of fears of exposure to germs) or develop
dermatological problems (e.g., skin lesion s due to excessive washing). Sometimes the
symptoms of the disorder inte rfere with its own treatment (e .g., when medications are con-
sidered contaminated). When th e disorder starts in childhood  or adolescence, individuals
may experience developmental difficulties. Fo r example, adolescents may avoid socializ-
ing with peers; young adults may struggle when they leave home to live independently.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 241
The result can be few significant relationship s outside the family and a lack of autonomy
and financial independence from their family of origin. In addition, some individuals with
OCD try to impose rules and prohibitions on  family members beca use of their disorder
(e.g., no one in the family can have visitors to the house for fear of contamination), and this
can lead to family dysfunction. 
Differential Diagnosis
Anxiety disorders. Recurrent thoughts, avoidant behavi ors, and repetitive requests for
reassurance can also occur in anxiety disorders. Ho wever, the recurrent thoughts that are
present in generalized anxiety disorder (i.e., worries) are usually ab out real-life concerns,
whereas the obsessions of OCD usually do no t involve real-life concerns and can include
content that is odd, irrational, or of a se emingly magical nature; moreover, compulsions
are often present and usually linked to the obsessions. Like individuals with OCD, indi-
viduals with specific phobia can have a fear re action to specific objects or situations; how-
ever, in specific phobia the feared object is usually much more circ umscribed, and rituals
are not present. In social anxiety disorder (social phobia), the feared objects or situations
are limited to social interactions, and avoida nce or reassurance seeking is focused on re-
ducing this social fear.
Major depressive disorder. OCD can be distinguished from the rumination of major
depressive disorder, in whic h thoughts are usually mood-c ongruent and not necessarily
experienced as intrusive or distressing; mo reover, ruminations are not linked to compul-
sions, as is typical in OCD. 
Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. In body dysmorphic disorder, the
obsessions and compulsions are limited to concerns about physical appearance; and in
trichotillomania (hair-pulling diso rder), the compulsive behavior is limited to hair pulling
in the absence of obsessions. Hoarding diso rder symptoms focus exclusively on the per-
sistent difficulty discarding or parting with  possessions, marked distress associated with
discarding items, and excessive accumulation of  objects. However, if an individual has ob-
sessions that are typical of OCD (e.g., concer ns about incompleteness or harm), and these
obsessions lead to compulsive hoarding behaviors (e.g., acquirin g all objects in a set to at-
tain a sense of completeness or not discarding old newspape rs because they may contain
information that could prevent harm), a di agnosis of OCD should be given instead. 
Eating disorders. OCD can be distinguished from anorexia nervosa in that in OCD the
obsessions and compulsions are not limite d to concerns about weight and food.
Tics (in tic disorder) and stereotyped movements. A tic is a sudden, rapid, recurrent,
nonrhythmic motor movement or vocalization (e.g., eye blinking, th roat clearing). A ste-
reotyped movement  is a repetitive, seemingly driven, nonfunctional motor behavior (e.g.,
head banging, body rocking,  self-biting). Tics and ster eotyped movements are typically
less complex than compulsions and are not aimed at neutralizing obsessions. However,
distinguishing between complex tics and comp ulsions can be difficult. Whereas compul-
sions are usually preceded by obsessions, tics  are often preceded by premonitory sensory
urges. Some individuals have symptoms of both OCD and a tic disorder, in which case
both diagnoses may be warranted. 
Psychotic disorders. Some individuals with OCD have poor insight or even delusional
OCD beliefs. However, they have obsessions and compulsions (disting uishing their
condition from delusional diso rder) and do not have other features of schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder (e.g., hallucinations or formal thought disorder). 
Other compulsive-like behaviors. Certain behaviors are sometimes described as “com-
pulsive,” including sexual behavior (in the ca se of paraphilias), ga mbling (i.e., gambling
242 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
disorder), and substance use (e.g., alcohol us e disorder). However, these behaviors differ
from the compulsions of OCD in that the pers on usually derives pleasure from the activity
and may wish to resist it only beca use of its deleterious consequences.
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. Although obsessive-compulsive person-
ality disorder and OCD have similar names, the clinical manifestations of these disorders
are quite different. Obsessive- compulsive personality disorder is not characterized by in-
trusive thoughts, images, or ur ges or by repetitive behavior s that are performed in re-
sponse to these intrusions; instead, it in volves an enduring and pervasive maladaptive
pattern of excessive perfectionism and rigid co ntrol. If an individual manifests symptoms
of both OCD and obsessive-compulsive persona lity disorder, both diagnoses can be given.
Comorbidity 
Individuals with OCD often have other psycho pathology. Many adults with the disorder
have a lifetime diagnosis of an anxiety disord er (76%; e.g., panic disorder, social anxiety
disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, specific  phobia) or a depressive or bipolar disorder
(63% for any depressive or bipolar disorder, with the most common being major depres-
sive disorder [41%]). Onset of OCD is usually later than for most co morbid anxiety disor-
ders (with the exception of separation anxiet y disorder) and PTSD bu t often precedes that
of depressive disorders. Comorbid obsessi ve-compulsive personality disorder is also
common in individuals with OCD (e.g., ranging from 23% to 32%). 
Up to 30% of individuals with OCD also have a lifetime tic disorder. A comorbid tic
disorder is most common in males with onset of OCD in childhood. These individuals
tend to differ from those without a history of tic disorders in the themes of their OCD
symptoms, comorbidity, course, and pattern of familial transmission. A triad of OCD, tic
disorder, and attention-deficit/hyperactivit y disorder can also be seen in children.
Disorders that occur more frequently in individuals with OCD than in those without
the disorder include several obsessive-compulsive and related disorders such as body
dysmorphic disorder, trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder), and excoriation (skin-pick-
ing) disorder. Finally, an association betw een OCD and some disorders characterized by
impulsivity, such as oppositional de fiant disorder, has been reported. 
OCD is also much more common in individuals with certain other disorders than
would be expected based on its prevalence in  the general population ; when one of those
other disorders is diagnosed, the individual should be assessed for OCD as well. For ex-
ample, in individuals with schizophrenia or  schizoaffective disorder, the prevalence of
OCD is approximately 12%. Rates of OCD are also  elevated in bipolar disorder; eating dis-
orders, such as anorexia nervosa and bu limia nervosa; and Tourette’s disorder.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 300.7 (F45.22)
A. Preoccupation with one or more perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance that
are not observable or appear slight to others.  
B. At some point during the course of the disorder, the individual has performed repetitive
behaviors (e.g., mirror checking, excessive grooming, skin picking, reassurance seek-
ing) or mental acts (e.g., comparing his or her appearance with that of others) in re-
sponse to the appearance concerns.
C. The preoccupation causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occu-
pational, or other important areas of functioning. 
D. The appearance preoccupation is not better explained by concerns with body fat or
weight in an individual whose symptoms meet diagnostic criteria for an eating disorder.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder 243
Specify if:
With muscle dysmorphia:  The individual is preoccupied with the idea that his or her
body build is too small or insufficiently muscular. This specifier is used even if the indi-
vidual is preoccupied with other body areas, which is often the case. 
Specify if: 
Indicate degree of insight regarding body dysmorphic disorder beliefs (e.g., “I look ugly” or
“I look deformed”).
With good or fair insight:  The individual recognizes that the body dysmorphic disor-
der beliefs are definitely or probably not true or that they may or may not be true.
With poor insight:  The individual thinks that the body dysmorphic disorder beliefs are
probably true.
With absent insight/delusional beliefs:  The individual is completely convinced that
the body dysmorphic disorder beliefs are true.
Diagnostic Features 
Individuals with body dysmorphic disorder (formerly known as dysmorphophobia ) are pre-
occupied with one or more perceived defects or flaws in their physical appearance, which
they believe look ugly, unattractive, abnormal , or deformed (Criterion A). The perceived
flaws are not observable or appear only slig ht to other individuals. Concerns range from
looking “unattractive” or “not  right” to looking “hideous” or “like a monster.” Preoccu-
pations can focus on one or many body are as, most commonly the skin (e.g., perceived
acne, scars, lines, wrinkles, paleness), hair (e.g., “thinning” hair or “e xcessive” body or fa-
cial hair), or nose (e.g., size or shape). Howe ver, any body area can be the focus of concern
(e.g., eyes, teeth, weight, stomach, breasts, le gs, face size or shape, lips, chin, eyebrows,
genitals). Some individuals are concerned abou t perceived asymmetry of body areas. The
preoccupations are intrusive,  unwanted, time-consuming (occurring, on average, 3–8
hours per day), and usually diff icult to resist or control. 
Excessive repetitive behaviors or mental ac ts (e.g., comparing) are performed in re-
sponse to the preoccupation (Criterion B). The individual feels driven to perform these be-
haviors, which are not pleasurable and may increase anxiety and dysphoria. They are
typically time-consuming and difficult to re sist or control. Common behaviors are com-
paring one’s appearance with that of other individuals; repeatedly checking perceived
defects in mirrors or other reflecting surf aces or examining them directly; excessively
grooming (e.g., combing, stylin g, shaving, plucking, or pull ing hair); camouflaging (e.g.,
repeatedly applying makeup or covering dislik ed areas with such things as a hat, clothing,
makeup, or hair); seeking reassurance about how the perceived flaws look; touching dis-
liked areas to check them; excessively exerci sing or weight lifting; and seeking cosmetic
procedures. Some individuals exce ssively tan (e.g., to darken “pale” skin or diminish per-
ceived acne), repeatedly change their clothe s (e.g., to camouflage perceived defects), or
compulsively shop (e.g., for beauty produc ts). Compulsive skin picking intended to
improve perceived skin defects is common and can cause skin damage, infections, or
ruptured blood vessels. The preoccupation must cause clinically significant distress or im-
pairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C);
usually both are present. Body dysmorphic diso rder must be differentiated from an eating
disorder.
Muscle dysmorphia, a form of body dysmorphic disorder occurring almost exclusively
in males, consists of preoccup ation with the idea that one’s body is too small or insuffi-
ciently lean or muscular. Individuals with this  form of the disorder actually have a nor-
mal-looking body or are even very muscular . They may also be preoccupied with other
body areas, such as skin or hair. A majority (b ut not all) diet, exerc ise, and/or lift weights
excessively, sometimes causing bodily damage . Some use potentially dangerous anabolic-
244 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
androgenic steroids and other substances to try to make their body bigger and more mus-
cular. Body dysmorphic disorder by proxy is a form of body dy smorphic disorder in
which individuals are preoccupied with defects they perceive in another person’s appear-
ance.
Insight regarding body dysmorphic disorder  beliefs can range from good to absent/
delusional (i.e., delusional beliefs consisting of complete conviction that the individual’s
view of their appearance is accurate and un distorted). On average, insight is poor; one-
third or more of individuals currently have delusional body dysmorphic disorder beliefs.
Individuals with delusional body dysmorphic di sorder tend to have greater morbidity in
some areas (e.g., suicidality), but this appears accounted fo r by their tendency to have
more severe body dysmorphic disorder symptoms. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
Many individuals with body dysmorphic disord er have ideas or delusions of reference,
believing that other people take special notice  of them or mock them because of how they
look. Body dysmorphic disorder is associated with high levels of anxiety, social anxiety,
social avoidance, depressed mood, neuroticism, and perfectionism as well as low extro-
version and low self-esteem. Many individuals are ashamed of their appearance and their
excessive focus on how they look, and are relu ctant to reveal their concerns to others. A
majority of individuals receiv e cosmetic treatment to try to  improve their perceived de-
fects. Dermatological treatment and surgery ar e most common, but any type (e.g., dental,
electrolysis) may be received . Occasionally, individuals may perform surgery on them-
selves. Body dysmorphic disorder appears to respond poorly to  such treatments and
sometimes becomes worse. Some individuals ta ke legal action or are violent toward the
clinician because they are dissat isfied with the cosmetic outcome.
Body dysmorphic disorder has been associat ed with executive dysfunction and visual
processing abnormalities, with a bias for an alyzing and encoding details rather than ho-
listic or configural aspects of vi sual stimuli. Individuals with this disorder tend to have a
bias for negative and threatening interpretati ons of facial expressions and ambiguous sce-
narios. 
Prevalence 
The point prevalence among U.S.  adults is 2.4% (2.5% in females and 2.2% in males). Out-
side the United States (i.e., Germany), cu rrent prevalence is approximately 1.7%–1.8%,
with a gender distribution similar to that in  the United States. The current prevalence is
9%–15% among dermatology patients, 7%–8% am ong U.S. cosmetic surgery patients, 3%–
16% among international cosmetic surgery patients (most studies), 8% among adult orth-
odontia patients, and 10% among patients presenting for oral or maxillofacial surgery.
Development and Course 
The mean age at disorder onset is 16–17 years, the median age at onset is 15 years, and the
most common age at onset is 12–13 years. Two-thirds of individuals have disorder onset
before age 18. Subclinical body dysmorphic diso rder symptoms begin, on average, at age
12 or 13 years. Subclinical concerns usually ev olve gradually to the full disorder, although
some individuals experience abrupt onset of body dysmorphic disorder. The disorder
appears to usually be chronic, although improvement is likely when evidence-based
treatment is received. The disorder’s clinical features appear largely similar in children/
adolescents and adults. Body dysm orphic disorder occurs in th e elderly, but little is known
about the disorder in this age group. Individu als with disorder onset before age 18 years
are more likely to attempt suicide, have more comorbidity, and have  gradual (rather than
acute) disorder onset than those with adult-onset body dysmorphic disorder.
Body Dysmorphic Disorder 245
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Body dysmorphic disorder has been as sociated with high rates of child-
hood neglect and abuse. 
Genetic and physiological. The prevalence of body dysmor phic disorder is elevated in
first-degree relatives of individuals with  obsessive-compulsi ve disorder (OCD).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
Body dysmorphic disorder has be en reported internationally. It appears that the disorder
may have more similarities th an differences across races and cultures but that cultural
values and preferences may influence symptom content to some degree. Taijin kyofusho,
included in the traditional Japanese diagnost ic system, has a subtype similar to body dys-
morphic disorder: shubo-kyofu  (“the phobia of a deformed body”). 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues 
Females and males appear to have more similariti es than differences in terms of most clin-
ical features— for example, di sliked body areas, types of repetitive behaviors, symptom
severity, suicidality, comorbidity, illness course, and receipt of cosmetic procedures for
body dysmorphic disorder. However, males ar e more likely to have genital preoccupa-
tions, and females are more likely to have a comorbid eating disord er. Muscle dysmorphia
occurs almost exclusively in males. 
Suicide Risk
Rates of suicidal ideation and suicide attemp ts are high in both adults and children/ado-
lescents with body dysmorphic disorder. Furthe rmore, risk for suicide appears high in ad-
olescents. A substantial proportion of individuals attribute suicidal ideation or suicide
attempts primarily to their appearance concerns. Individuals with body dysmorphic dis-
order have many risk factors for completed suic ide, such as high rates of suicidal ideation
and suicide attempts, demographic characterist ics associated with suicide, and high rates
of comorbid major depressive disorder. 
Functional Consequences of 
Body Dysmorphic Disorder
Nearly all individuals with body dysmorphic disorder experience impaired psychosocial
functioning because of their appearance concerns. Impairment can range from moderate
(e.g., avoidance of some social situations) to  extreme and incapacitating (e.g., being com-
pletely housebound). On average, psychosocial functioning and quality of life are mark-
edly poor. More severe body dysmorphic diso rder symptoms are associated with poorer
functioning and quality of life. Most individu als experience impairment in their job, aca-
demic, or role function ing (e.g., as a parent or caregive r), which is often severe (e.g., per-
forming poorly, missing school  or work, not working). About 20% of youths with body
dysmorphic disorder report dropping out of school primarily because of their body dys-
morphic disorder symptoms. Impair ment in social functioning (e.g., social activities, rela-
tionships, intimacy), includ ing avoidance, is common. In dividuals may be housebound
because of their body dysmor phic disorder symptoms, some times for years. A high pro-
portion of adults and adolescents have been psychiatrically hospitalized.
Differential Diagnosis
Normal appearance concerns and cl early noticeable physical defects. Body dysmor-
phic disorder differs from normal appearance  concerns in being characterized by exces-
246 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
sive appearance-related preoccupations and re petitive behaviors that are time-consuming,
are usually difficult to resist or control, and ca use clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in functioning. Physical defects that ar e clearly noticeable (i.e., not slight) are not
diagnosed as body dysmorphic disorder. Ho wever, skin picking as a symptom of body
dysmorphic disorder can cause noticeable skin lesions and scarring; in such cases, body dys-
morphic disorder should be diagnosed.
Eating disorders. In an individual with an eating di sorder, concerns ab out being fat are
considered a symptom of the eating disorder  rather than body dysmorphic disorder.
However, weight concerns may occur in body  dysmorphic disorder. Eating disorders and
body dysmorphic disorder can be comorbid, in which case both should be diagnosed. 
Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. The preoccupations and repetitive
behaviors of body dysmorphic  disorder differ from obsessions and compulsions in OCD
in that the former focus only on appearance. These disorders have other differences, such
as poorer insight in body dysmorphic disorder. When sk in picking is intended to improve
the appearance of perceived skin defects, bo dy dysmorphic disorder, rather than excoria-
tion (skin-picking) disorder, is diagnosed. Wh en hair removal (plucking, pulling, or other
types of removal) is intended to improve pe rceived defects in the appearance of facial
or body hair, body dysmorphic disorder is diagnosed rather than trichotillomania (hair-
pulling disorder).
Illness anxiety disorder. Individuals with body dysmor phic disorder are not preoccu-
pied with having or acquiring a serious illness and do not have particularly elevated levels
of somatization. 
Major depressive disorder. The prominent preoccupation with appearance and exces-
sive repetitive behaviors in body dysmorphi c disorder differentiate it from major de-
pressive disorder. However, major depressi ve disorder and depressive symptoms are
common in individuals with body dysmorphic disorder, often appearing to be secondary
to the distress and impairment that body dysmorphic disorder causes. Body dysmorphic
disorder should be diagnosed in  depressed individuals if diag nostic criteria for body dys-
morphic disorder are met. 
Anxiety disorders. Social anxiety and avoidance are common in body dysmorphic dis-
order. However, unlike social anxiety disorder (social phobia), agoraphobia, and avoidant
personality disorder, body dy smorphic disorder includes prominent appearance-related
preoccupation, which may be delusional, and repetitive behaviors, and the social anxiety
and avoidance are due to concerns about perceived appearance defects and the belief or
fear that other people will consider these indivi duals ugly, ridicule them, or reject them be-
cause of their physical features. Unlike gene ralized anxiety disorder, anxiety and worry in
body dysmorphic disorder focus on  perceived appearance flaws. 
Psychotic disorders. Many individuals with body dy smorphic disorder have delu-
sional appearance beliefs (i.e., complete convic tion that their view of their perceived de-
fects is accurate), which is diagnosed as body dysmorphic disorder, with absent insight/
delusional beliefs, not as delusional disorder. Appearance-related ideas or delusions of
reference are common in body dysmorphic di sorder; however, unlike schizophrenia or
schizoaffective disorder, body dysmorphic disorder involves  prominent appearance pre-
occupations and related repetitive behaviors,  and disorganized behavior and other psy-
chotic symptoms are absent (except for appearance beliefs , which may be delusional). 
Other disorders and symptoms. Body dysmorphic disorder should not be diagnosed if
the preoccupation is limited to discomfort with  or a desire to be rid of one’s primary and/
or secondary sex characteristics in an individu al with g ender dysphoria or if the preoccu-
pation focuses on the belief th at one emits a foul or offens ive body odor as in olfactory
reference syndrome (which is not a DSM-5 di sorder). Body identity integrity disorder
Hoarding Disorder 247
(apotemnophilia) (which is not a DSM-5 disord er) involves a desire to have a limb ampu-
tated to correct an experience of mismatch be tween a person’s sense of body identity and
his or her actual anatomy. However, the conc ern does not focus on the limb’s appearance,
as it would in body dysmorphic disorder. Koro,  a culturally related disorder that usually
occurs in epidemics in Southeastern Asia, consists  of a fear that the penis (labia, nipples, or
breasts in females) is shrink ing or retracting and will disa ppear into the abdomen, often
accompanied by a belief that death will result . Koro differs from body dysmorphic disor-
der in several ways, including a focus on death rather than preoccupation with perceived
ugliness. Dysmorphic concern  (which is not a DSM-5 disorder) is a much broader construct
than, and is not equivalent to, body dysmorphi c disorder. It involves symptoms reflecting
an overconcern with slight or imagined flaws in appearance.
Comorbidity 
Major depressive disorder is the most commo n comorbid disorder, with onset usually af-
ter that of body dysmorphic disorder. Comorb id social anxiety disorder (social phobia),
OCD, and substance-related disorders are also common.
Hoarding Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 300.3 (F42)
A. Persistent difficulty discarding or parting with possessions, regardless of their actual value.
B. This difficulty is due to a perceived need to save the items and to distress associated
with discarding them.
C. The difficulty discarding possessions results in the accumulation of possessions that
congest and clutter active living areas and substantially compromises their intended
use. If living areas are uncluttered, it is only because of the interventions of third parties
(e.g., family members, cleaners, authorities).
D. The hoarding causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning (including maintaining a safe environ-
ment for self and others).
E. The hoarding is not attributable to another medical condition (e.g., brain injury, cere-
brovascular disease, Prader-Willi syndrome).
F. The hoarding is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder (e.g.,
obsessions in obsessive-compulsive disorder, decreased energy in major depressive
disorder, delusions in schizophrenia or another psychotic disorder, cognitive deficits in
major neurocognitive disorder, restricted interests in autism spectrum disorder). 
Specify if:
With excessive acquisition:  If difficulty discarding possessions is accompanied by ex-
cessive acquisition of items that are not needed or for which there is no available space.
Specify if:
With good or fair insight: The individual recognizes that hoarding-related beliefs and
behaviors (pertaining to difficulty discarding items, clutter, or excessive acquisition) are
problematic.
With poor insight : The individual is mostly convinced that hoarding-related beliefs
and behaviors (pertaining to difficulty discarding items, clutter, or excessive acquisi-
tion) are not problematic despite evidence to the contrary.
With absent insight/delusional beliefs:  The individual is completely convinced that
hoarding-related beliefs and behaviors (pertaini ng to difficulty discarding items, clutter,
or excessive acquisition) are not problematic despite evidence to the contrary.
248 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
Specifiers
With excessive acquisition. Approximately 80%–90% of individuals with hoarding
disorder display excessive acquisition. The most frequent form of acqu isition is excessive
buying, followed by acquisition of free item s (e.g., leaflets, items discarded by others).
Stealing is less common. Some individuals may deny excessive acquisition when first as-
sessed, yet it may appear later during the co urse of treatment. Individuals with hoarding
disorder typically experience distress if they are unable to or are prevented from acquiring
items.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of hoarding  disorder is persistent difficulties discarding or parting
with possessions, regardless of their actual value (Criterion A). The term persistent  indi-
cates a long-standing difficulty rather than more transient life circumstances that may lead
to excessive clutter, such as inheriting prop erty. The difficulty in discarding possessions
noted in Criterion A refers to  any form of discarding, including throwing away, selling,
giving away, or recycling. The main reasons given for these difficult ies are the perceived
utility or aesthetic value of the items or stro ng sentimental attachment to the possessions.
Some individuals feel responsi ble for the fate of their possessions and often go to great
lengths to avoid being wasteful. Fears of lo sing important information are also common.
The most commonly saved item s are newspapers, magazines, old clothing, bags, books,
mail, and paperwork, but virtually any item can be saved. The nature of items is not lim-
ited to possessions that most other people would define as useles s or of limited value.
Many individuals collect and save large numbers of valuable things as well, which are of-
ten found in piles mixed with other less valuable items. 
Individuals with hoarding disorder purpos efully save possessions and experience dis-
tress when facing the prospect of discarding them (Criterion B). This criterion emphasizes
that the saving of possessions is intentional,  which discriminates hoarding disorder from
other forms of psychopathology that are ch aracterized by the pa ssive accumulation of
items or the absence of distress  when possessions are removed. 
Individuals accumulate large numbers of items that fill up and clutter active living ar-
eas to the extent that their intended use is no longer possible (Criterion C). For example,
the individual may not be able to cook in the kitchen, sleep in his or her bed, or sit in a
chair. If the space can be used, it  is only with great difficulty. Clutter  is defined as a large
group of usually unrelated or marginally rela ted objects piled together in a disorganized
fashion in spaces designed for ot her purposes (e.g., tabletops,  floor, hallway). Criterion C
emphasizes the “active” living areas of the ho me, rather than more peripheral areas, such
as garages, attics, or basements, that are so metimes cluttered in homes of individuals with-
out hoarding disorder. However, individuals with hoarding disorder often have posses-
sions that spill beyond the active living areas and can occupy and impair the use of other
spaces, such as vehicles, yards, the workplace,  and friends’ and relatives’ houses. In some
cases, living areas may be uncluttered because of the intervention of third parties (e.g.,
family members, cleaners, loca l authorities). Individuals who have been forced to clear
their homes still have a symptom picture that meets criteria fo r hoarding disorder because
the lack of clutter is due to a third-party intervention. Hoarding disorder contrasts with
normative collecting beha vior, which is organized and systematic, even if in some cases
the actual amount of possessions may be similar to the amount accumulated by an indi-
vidual with hoarding disord er. Normative collecting does not produce the clutter, dis-
tress, or impairment typi cal of hoarding disorder. 
Symptoms (i.e., difficulties discarding and/or  clutter) must cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational , or other important area s of functioning, in-
cluding maintaining a safe environment for self  and others (Criterion D). In some cases,
Hoarding Disorder 249
particularly when there is poor insight, the individual may not report distress, and the im-
pairment may be apparent only to those arou nd the individual. However, any attempts to
discard or clear the possessions by third pa rties result in high levels of distress. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Other common features of hoarding disorder include indecisiveness, perfectionism,
avoidance, procrastination, di fficulty planning and organizing tasks, and distractibility.
Some individuals with hoarding disorder live in unsanitary conditions that may be a log-
ical consequence of severely cluttered spaces and/or that are related to planning and or-
ganizing difficulties. Animal hoarding  can be defined as the accumulation of a large number
of animals and a failure to provide minimal st andards of nutrition, sanitation, and veter-
inary care and to act on the de teriorating condition of the an imals (including disease, star-
vation, or death) and the en vironment (e.g., severe overcrowding, extremely unsanitary
conditions). Animal hoarding may be a spec ial manifestation of ho arding disorder. Most
individuals who hoard animals also hoard inan imate objects. The mo st prominent differ-
ences between animal and object hoarding are the extent of unsanitary conditions and the
poorer insight in animal hoarding. 
Prevalence
Nationally representative prevalence studies of hoarding disorder are not available. Com-
munity surveys estimate the point prevalence of clinically significant hoarding in the
United States and Europe to be approximately 2%–6%. Hoarding disorder affects both
males and females, but some epidemiological studies have reported a significantly greater
prevalence among males. This contrasts with clinical samples, which are predominantly
female. Hoarding symptoms appear to be almost three times more prevalent in older
adults (ages 55–94 years) compared with younger adults (ages 34–44 years). 
Development and Course
Hoarding appears to begin early in life and spans well into the late stages. Hoarding symp-
toms may first emerge around ages 11–15 years, start interfering with the individual’s ev-
eryday functioning by the mid-20s, and cause clinically significant impairment by the
mid-30s. Participants in clinical research stud ies are usually in their 50s. Thus, the severity
of hoarding increases with each decade of lif e. Once symptoms begin, the course of hoard-
ing is often chronic, with few individuals reporting a waxing and waning course.
Pathological hoarding in children appears to be easily distin guished from develop-
mentally adaptive saving and collecting behaviors. Because children and adolescents
typically do not control their living environm ent and discarding behaviors, the possible
intervention of third parties (e.g., parents ke eping the spaces usable and thus reducing in-
terference) should be considered when making the diagnosis. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Indecisiveness is a prominent featur e of individuals wi th hoarding dis-
order and their first-degree relatives.
Environmental. Individuals with hoarding disorder often retrospectively report stressful
and traumatic life events preceding the onset of the disorder or causing an exacerbation. 
Genetic and physiological. Hoarding behavior is familial,  with about 50% of individu-
als who hoard reporting having a relative who also hoards. Twin studies indicate that ap-
proximately 50% of the variability in hoarding behavior is attr ibutable to additive genetic
factors. 
250 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
While most of the research has been done in  Western, industrialized countries and urban
communities, the available data from non-Western and developing countries suggest that
hoarding is a universal phenomenon wi th consistent clinical features. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
The key features of hoarding disorder (i.e., difficulties discarding, excessive amount of
clutter) are generally comparable in males an d females, but females tend to display more
excessive acquisition, particularly excessive buying, than do males. 
Functional Consequences  of Hoarding Disorder
Clutter impairs basic activities, such as moving through the house, cooking, cleaning, per-
sonal hygiene, and even sleepin g. Appliances may be broken, and utilities such as water
and electricity may be disconnected, as access for repair work may be difficult. Quality of
life is often considerably impaired. In severe cases, hoarding can put in dividuals at risk for
fire, falling (especially elderly individuals), po or sanitation, and other health risks. Hoard-
ing disorder is associated with occupational impairment, poor physical health, and high
social service utilization. Family relationsh ips are frequently under great strain. Conflict
with neighbors and local author ities is common, and a substa ntial proportion of individ-
uals with severe hoarding disorder have been  involved in legal eviction proceedings, and
some have a history of eviction. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions. Hoarding disorder is not di agnosed if the symptoms are
judged to be a direct conseque nce of another medical condition (Criterion E), such as trau-
matic brain injury, surgical resection for trea tment of a tumor or seizure control, cerebro-
vascular disease, infections of the central ne rvous system (e.g., herpes simplex encephalitis),
or neurogenetic conditions such as Prader -Willi syndrome. Damage to the anterior ven-
tromedial prefrontal and cingulate cortices ha s been particularly associated with the ex-
cessive accumulation of objects. In these individuals, the hoarding behavior is not present
prior to the onset of the brain damage and a ppears shortly after the brain damage occurs.
Some of these individuals appear to have li ttle interest in the accumulated items and are
able to discard them easily or do not care if  others discard them, whereas others appear to
be very reluctant to discard anything. 
Neurodevelopmental disorders. Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumula-
tion of objects is judged to be a direct co nsequence of a neurodevel opmental disorder, such
as autism spectrum disorder or  intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder).
Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders. Hoarding disorder is not di-
agnosed if the accumulation of objects is judged  to be a direct consequence of delusions or
negative symptoms in schizophrenia sp ectrum and other psychotic disorders.
Major depressive episode. Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumulation of
objects is judged to be a dire ct consequence of ps ychomotor retardation, fatigue, or loss of
energy during a major depressive episode. 
Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the symptoms
are judged to be a direct consequence of typical obsessions or compulsions, such as fears
of contamination, harm, or feelings of inco mpleteness in obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD). Feelings of incomplete ness (e.g., losing one’s identity , or having to document and
preserve all life experiences) are the most frequent OCD symptoms associated with this
form of hoarding. The accumulation of objects can also be the result of persistently avoid-
Trichotillomania (Hair-Pulling Disorder) 251
ing onerous rituals (e.g., not discarding object s in order to avoid endless washing or check-
ing rituals).
In OCD, the behavior is gene rally unwanted and highly distressing, and the individual ex-
periences no pleasure or reward from it. Excessive acquisition is  usually not present; if exces-
sive acquisition is present, items are acquired because of a specific obsession (e.g., the need to
buy items that have been accidentally touched in order to avoid cont aminating other people),
not because of a genuine desire to possess the items. Individuals who hoard in the context of
OCD are also more likely to accumulate bizarre it ems, such as trash, feces, urine, nails, hair,
used diapers, or rotten food. Accumulation of su ch items is very unusual in hoarding disorder.
When severe hoarding appears concurrently  with other typical symptoms of OCD but
is judged to be independent from these symptoms, both hoarding disorder and OCD may
be diagnosed. 
Neurocognitive disorders. Hoarding disorder is not diagnosed if the accumulation of
objects is judged to be a direct consequence of a degenerati ve disorder, such as neurocog-
nitive disorder associated wi th frontotemporal lobar degeneration or Alzheimer’s disease.
Typically, onset of the accumu lating behavior is gradual and follows onset of the neuro-
cognitive disorder. The accumulating behavior  may be accompanied by self-neglect and
severe domestic squalor, alongside other neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as disinhibi-
tion, gambling, rituals/stereotypies, tics, and self-injurious behaviors. 
Comorbidity
Approximately 75% of individuals with hoardi ng disorder have a comorbid mood or anx-
iety disorder. The most common comorbid conditions are major depressive disorder (up
to 50% of cases), social anxi ety disorder (social phobia), an d generalized anxiety disorder.
Approximately 20% of individuals with hoardi ng disorder also have symptoms that meet
diagnostic criteria for OCD. These comorbidit ies may often be the main reason for consul-
tation, because individuals are unlikely to spontaneously report hoarding symptoms, and
these symptoms are often not asked ab out in routine clinical interviews.
Trichotillomania (Hair-Pulling Disorder)
Diagnostic Criteria 312.39 (F63.3)
A. Recurrent pulling out of one’s hair, resulting in hair loss.
B. Repeated attempts to decrease or stop hair pulling. 
C. The hair pulling causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning. 
D. The hair pulling or hair loss is not attri butable to another medical condition (e.g., a der-
matological condition). 
E. The hair pulling is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder
(e.g., attempts to improve a perceived defect or flaw in appearance in body dysmorphic
disorder).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of trichotillomania (hai r-pulling disorder) is the recurrent pulling out
of one’s own hair (Criterion A). Hair pullin g may occur from any region of the body in
which hair grows; the most co mmon sites are the scalp, eyebrows, and eyelids, while less
common sites are axillary, facial, pubic, and peri-rectal regions. Hair-pulling sites may
vary over time. Hair pulling may occur in brief episodes sc attered throughout the day or
during less frequent bu t more sustained periods that can continue for hours, and such hair
252 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
pulling may endure for months or years. Criterion A requires th at hair pulling lead to hair
loss, although individuals with this disorder may pull hair in a widely distributed pattern
(i.e., pulling single hairs from all over a site) such that hair loss may not be clearly visible.
Alternatively, individuals may attempt to conceal or camouflage hair loss (e.g., by using
makeup, scarves, or wigs). Individuals with  trichotillomania have made repeated at-
tempts to decrease or stop hair pulling (Crite rion B). Criterion C indicates that hair pulling
causes clinically significant distress or impa irment in social, occupational, or other impor-
tant areas of functioning. The term distress  includes negative affects that may be experi-
enced by individuals with hair  pulling, such as feeling a lo ss of control, embarrassment,
and shame. Significant impairment may occur in several different areas of functioning
(e.g., social, occupational, academic, and leisure), in part because of avoidance of work,
school, or other public situations. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Hair pulling may be accompanied by a range of behaviors or rituals involving hair. Thus,
individuals may search for a particular kind of hair to pull (e.g., hairs with a specific tex-
ture or color), may try to pull out hair in a spec ific way (e.g., so that the root comes out in-
tact), or may visually examine or tactilely or  orally manipulate the hair after it has been
pulled (e.g., rolling the hair between the fingers,  pulling the strand between the teeth, bit-
ing the hair into pieces, or swallowing the hair). 
Hair pulling may also be preceded or acco mpanied by various emot ional states; it may
be triggered by feelings of anxiety or boredo m, may be preceded by an increasing sense of
tension (either immediately before pulling out the hair or when attempting to resist the
urge to pull), or may lead to gratification, pleasure, or a sense of relief when the hair is
pulled out. Hair-pulling behavior may involv e varying degrees of conscious awareness,
with some individuals displaying more focused attention on the hair pulling (with pre-
ceding tension and subsequent relief), and other individuals displaying more automatic
behavior (in which the hair pulling seems to occur without full awareness). Many individ-
uals report a mix of both behavioral styles. Some individuals experience an “itch-like” or
tingling sensation in the scalp that is alleviated by the act of pulling hair. Pain does not
usually accompany hair pulling.
Patterns of hair loss are highly variable. Ar eas of complete alopecia, as well as areas of
thinned hair density, are common. When the sc alp is involved, there may be a predilection
for pulling out hair in the crown or parietal regions. There may be a pattern of nearly com-
plete baldness except for a narrow perimeter around the outer margins of the scalp, par-
ticularly at the nape of the neck (“tonsure trichotillomania”). Eyebrows and eyelashes may
be completely absent. 
Hair pulling does not usually occur in the pr esence of other individuals, except imme-
diate family members. Some in dividuals have urges to pull hair from other individuals
and may sometimes try to find opportunities to  do so surreptitiously. Some individuals
may pull hairs from pets, dolls, and other fi brous materials (e.g., sw eaters or carpets).
Some individuals may deny their hair pulling to others. The majority of individuals with
trichotillomania also have one or more other body-focused repetitive behaviors, including
skin picking, nail biting, and lip chewing.
Prevalence
In the general population, the 12-month preval ence estimate for trichotillomania in adults
and adolescents is 1%–2%. Females are more frequently affected than males, at a ratio of
approximately 10:1. This estimate  likely reflects the true gender  ratio of the condition, al-
though it may also reflect differential treatment seeking based on ge nder or cultural at-
titudes regarding appearance (e.g., acceptan ce of normative hair loss among males).
Among children with trichotillo mania, males and females are more equally represented. 
Trichotillomania (Hair-Pulling Disorder) 253
Development and Course
Hair pulling may be seen in infants, and this behavior typically resolves during early devel-
opment. Onset of hair pulling in trichotilloman ia most commonly coincides with, or follows
the onset of, puberty. Sites of hair pulling may vary over time. The usual course of trichotillo-
mania is chronic, with some waxing and waning if the disorder is untreated. Symptoms may
possibly worsen in females accompanying horm onal changes (e.g., menstruation, perimeno-
pause). For some individuals, the disorder may come and go for weeks, months, or years at a
time. A minority of individuals remit without su bsequent relapse within a few years of onset. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. There is evidence for a genetic vulnerability to trichotillo-
mania. The disorder is more common in in dividuals with obsessi ve-compulsive disorder
(OCD) and their first-degree relative s than in the general population. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
Trichotillomania appears to manifest similarly across cultures, although there is a paucity
of data from non-Western regions.
Diagnostic Markers
Most individuals with trichotillomania admit to hair pulling; thus, dermatopathological
diagnosis is rarely required. Skin biopsy an d dermoscopy (or trichoscopy) of trichotillo-
mania are able to differentiat e the disorder from other causes of alopecia. In trichotil-
lomania, dermoscopy shows a range of charac teristic features, in cluding decreased hair
density, short vellus hair, and broken hairs with different shaft lengths. 
Functional Consequences of 
Trichotillomania (Hair-Pulling Disorder)
Trichotillomania is associated with distress as well as with social and occupational impair-
ment. There may be irreversible  damage to hair growth and hair quality. Infrequent med-
ical consequences of trichotillomania includ e digit purpura, muscul oskeletal injury (e.g.,
carpal tunnel syndrome; back, shoulder and neck pain), blepharitis, and dental damage
(e.g., worn or broken teeth due to hair biting). Swallowing of hair (trichophagia) may lead
to trichobezoars, with subs equent anemia, abdominal pain , hematemesis, nausea and
vomiting, bowel obstruction,  and even perforation. 
Differential Diagnosis
Normative hair re moval/manipulation. Trichotillomania should not be diagnosed when
hair removal is performed solely for cosmetic reasons (i.e., to improve one’s physical ap-
pearance). Many individuals twist and play with  their hair, but this behavior does not usu-
ally qualify for a diagnosis of trichotillomania . Some individuals may bite rather than pull
hair; again, this does not qualify for a diagnosis of trichotillomania.
Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. Individuals with OCD and sym-
metry concerns may pull out hairs as part of their symmetry rituals, and individuals with
body dysmorphic disorder may remove body ha ir that they perceive as ugly, asymmetri-
cal, or abnormal; in such cases a diagnosis of  trichotillomania is not given. The description
of body-focused repetitive behavior disorder  in other specified ob sessive-compulsive and
related disorder excludes individuals who meet  diagnostic criteria for trichotillomania.
254 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
Neurodevelopmental disorders. In neurodevelopmental di sorders, hair pulling may
meet the definition of stereotypies (e.g., in stereotypic movement disorder). Tics (in tic dis-
orders) rarely lead to hair pulling.
Psychotic disorder. Individuals with a psychotic disord er may remove hair in response
to a delusion or hallucinati on. Trichotillomania is not diagnosed in such cases.
Another medical condition. Trichotillomania is not diagnosed if the hair pulling or hair
loss is attributable to another medical conditio n (e.g., inflammation of the skin or other der-
matological conditions). Other causes of scarri ng alopecia (e.g., alop ecia areata, androgenic
alopecia, telogen effluvium) or nonscarring al opecia (e.g., chronic discoid lupus erythema-
tosus, lichen planopilaris, central centrifugal cicatricial alopecia, pseudopelade, folliculitis
decalvans, dissecting folliculitis, acne keloidalis nuchae) should be considered in individu-
als with hair loss who deny hair pulling. Skin biopsy or dermoscopy ca n be used to differ-
entiate individuals with tric hotillomania from those with  dermatological disorders.
Substance-related disorders. Hair-pulling symptoms may be exacerbated by certain
substances—for example, stimulants—but it is less likely that substances are the primary
cause of persistent hair pulling. 
Comorbidity
Trichotillomania is often accompanied by ot her mental disorders, most commonly major
depressive disorder and excoriation (skin- picking) disorder. Repetitive body-focused
symptoms other than hair pulling or skin picking (e.g. nail biting) occur in the majority of
individuals with trichotillomania and may dese rve an additional diagnosis of other spec-
ified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (i.e., body-focused repetitive behavior
disorder).
Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 698.4 (L98.1)
A. Recurrent skin picking resulting in skin lesions.
B. Repeated attempts to decrease or stop skin picking.
C. The skin picking causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning. 
D. The skin picking is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., co-
caine) or another medical condition (e.g., scabies). 
E. The skin picking is not better explained by symptoms of another mental disorder (e.g.,
delusions or tactile hallucinations in a psychotic disorder, attempts to improve a per-
ceived defect or flaw in appearance in body dysmorphic disorder, stereotypies in ste-
reotypic movement disorder, or intention to harm oneself in nonsuicidal self-injury).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of excori ation (skin-picking) disorder is recurrent picking at one’s
own skin (Criterion A). The mo st commonly picked sites are the face, arms, and hands, but
many individuals pick from multiple body sit es. Individuals may pick at healthy skin, at
minor skin irregularities, at le sions such as pimples or calluse s, or at scabs from previous
picking. Most individuals pick with their fi ngernails, although many use tweezers, pins,
or other objects. In addition to skin picking,  there may be skin rubbing, squeezing, lancing,
and biting. Individuals with excoriation diso rder often spend signif icant amounts of time
on their picking behavior, sometimes several hours per day, and such skin picking may
Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder 255
endure for months or years. Cr iterion A requires that skin picking lead to skin lesions, al-
though individuals with this disorder often at tempt to conceal or camouflage such lesions
(e.g., with makeup or clothing). Individuals with excoriation disorder have made repeated
attempts to decrease or stop skin picking (Criterion B).
Criterion C indicates that skin picking causes clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other im portant areas of func tioning. The term distress  in-
cludes negative affects that may be experience d by individuals with skin picking, such as
feeling a loss of control, em barrassment, and shame. Significant impairment may occur in
several different areas of functioning (e.g., so cial, occupational, academic, and leisure), in
part because of avoidance of social situations. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Skin picking may be accompanied by a range of behaviors or rituals involving skin or scabs.
Thus, individuals may search for a particular kind of scab to pull, and they may examine,
play with, or mouth or swallow th e skin after it has be en pulled. Skin picking may also be pre-
ceded or accompanied by various emotional stat es. Skin picking may be triggered by feelings
of anxiety or boredom, may be preceded by an  increasing sense of tension (either immedi-
ately before picking the skin or when attempting to resist the urge to pick), and may lead to
gratification, pleasure, or a sense of relief when the skin or scab has been picked. Some indi-
viduals report picking in response to a minor skin irregularity or to relieve an uncomfortable
bodily sensation. Pain is not routinely reported to accompany skin picking. Some individuals
engage in skin picking that is more focused (i .e., with preceding tens ion and subsequent re-
lief), whereas others engage in more automatic picking (i.e., when skin picking occurs with-
out preceding tension and without full awarene ss), and many have a mix of both behavioral
styles. Skin picking does not usually occur in the presence of other individuals, except im-
mediate family members. Some individual s report picking the skin of others.
Prevalence
In the general population, the lifetime prevalence  for excoriation disorder in adults is 1.4%
or somewhat higher. Three-quarters or more of individuals with the disorder are female.
This likely reflects the true gender ratio of the condition, although it may also reflect dif-
ferential treatment seeking based on gender or cultural attitudes regarding appearance.
Development and Course
Although individuals with excoriation disorder may present at various ages, the skin pick-
ing most often has onset during adolescence, commonly coinciding wi th or following the
onset of puberty. The disorder frequently begins with a dermatological condition, such
as acne. Sites of skin picking may vary over time. The usual course is chronic, with some
waxing and waning if untreated. For some in dividuals, the disorder may come and go for
weeks, months, or years at a time.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Excoriation disorder is more  common in individuals with
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and thei r first-degree family members than in the
general population.
Diagnostic Markers
Most individuals with excoriation disorder admit to skin picking; therefore, dermato-
pathological diagnosis is rarely required. Ho wever, the disorder ma y have characteristic
features on histopathology. 
256 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
Functional Consequences of 
Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder 
Excoriation disorder is associated  with distress as well as with social and occupational im-
pairment. The majority of indi viduals with this condition spend at least 1 hour per day
picking, thinking about picking, and resist ing urges to pick. Many individuals report
avoiding social or entertainment events as well as going out in public. A majority of indi-
viduals with the disorder also report experien cing work interference from skin picking on
at least a daily or weekly basi s. A significant proportion of students with excoriation disor-
der report having missed school, having expe rienced difficulties managing responsibilities
at school, or having had diffi culties studying because of skin picking. Medical complica-
tions of skin picking include ti ssue damage, scarring, and infe ction and can be life-threaten-
ing. Rarely, synovitis of the wrists due to ch ronic picking has been reported. Skin picking
often results in significant tissue damage and sc arring. It frequently requires antibiotic treat-
ment for infection, and on o ccasion it may require surgery.
Differential Diagnosis
Psychotic disorder. Skin picking may occur in response to a delusion (i.e., parasitosis)
or tactile hallucination (i.e., fo rmication) in a psychotic disorder. In such cases, excoriation
disorder should not be diagnosed. 
Other obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. Excessive washing compulsions
in response to contamination obsessions in in dividuals with OCD may lead to skin lesions,
and skin picking may occur in individuals with body dysmorphic disorder who pick their
skin solely because of appearance concerns; in  such cases, excoriatio n disorder should not
be diagnosed. The description of body-focused repetitive behavior disorder in other spec-
ified obsessive-compulsive and related diso rder excludes individuals whose symptoms
meet diagnostic criteria for excoriation disorder.
Neurodevelopmental disorders. While stereotypic movement disorder may be charac-
terized by repetitive self-injurious behavior , onset is in the early developmental period.
For example, individuals with  the neurogenetic condition Prader-Willi syndrome may
have early onset of skin picking, and their symptoms may meet criteria for stereotypic
movement disorder. While tics in individuals with Tourette’s disorder may lead to self-
injury, the behavior is not ti c-like in excoriation disorder. 
Somatic symptom and related disorders. Excoriation disorder is not diagnosed if the
skin lesion is primarily attributable to de ceptive behaviors in factitious disorder.
Other disorders. Excoriation disorder is not diagnosed if the skin picking is primarily
attributable to the intention to harm oneself th at is characteristic of nonsuicidal self-injury.
Other medical conditions. Excoriation disorder is not di agnosed if the skin picking is
primarily attributable to another medical condition. For example, scabies is a dermatolog-
ical condition invariably associated with seve re itching and scratching. However, excori-
ation disorder may be precipitated or ex acerbated by an unde rlying dermatological
condition. For example, acne may lead to so me scratching and picking, which may also be
associated with comorbid excoriation diso rder. The differentiation between these two
clinical situations (acne with some scratching  and picking vs. acne with comorbid excori-
ation disorder) requires an assessment of the extent to which the individual’s skin picking
has become independent of the unde rlying dermatological condition. 
Substance/medication-induced disorders. Skin-picking symptoms may also be induced
by certain substances (e.g., cocaine), in whic h case excoriation disorder should not be di-
agnosed. If such skin picking is clinically significant, then a diagnosis of substance/med-
ication-induced obsessive-compulsive and re lated disorder should be considered. 
Substance/Medication-Induced Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorder 257
Comorbidity
Excoriation disorder is often accompanied by other mental disorders. Such disorders in-
clude OCD and trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder), as well as major depressive dis-
order. Repetitive body-focused symptoms othe r than skin picking an d hair pulling (e.g.,
nail biting) occur in many individuals with excoriation disorder and may deserve an ad-
ditional diagnosis of other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (i.e.,
body-focused repetitive behavior disorder).
Substance/Medication-Induced
 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. Obsessions, compulsions, skin picking, hair pulling, other body-focused repetitive be-
haviors, or other symptoms characteristic of the obsessive-compulsive and related dis-
orders predominate in the clinical picture. 
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both
(1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication
or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Crite-
rion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by an obsessive-compulsive and related disor-
der that is not substance/medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent ob-
sessive-compulsive and related disorder could include the following:
The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms
persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of acute
withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence suggesting the exis-
tence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced obsessive-compul-
sive and related disorder (e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-
related episodes). 
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Note:  This diagnosis should be made in addition to a diagnosis of substance intoxication
or substance withdrawal only when the symptom s in Criterion A predominate in the clinical
picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention. 
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medica-
tion]-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorders are indicated in the table below.
Note that the ICD-10-CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance
use disorder present for the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is
comorbid with the substance-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, the 4th
position character is “1,” and the clinician should record “mild [substance] use disorder”
before the substance-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (e.g., “mild co-
caine use disorder with cocaine-induced obs essive-compulsive and related disorder”). If
a moderate or severe substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced ob-
sessive-compulsive and related disorder, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician
should record “moderate [substance] use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,”
depending on the severity of the comorbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid
258 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th
position character is “9,” and the clinician should record only the substance-induced ob-
sessive-compulsive and related disorder.
Specify if (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for di-
agnoses associated with substance class):
With onset during intoxication:  If the criteria are met for intoxication with the sub-
stance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal:  If criteria are met for withdrawal from the substance
and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
With onset after medication use:  Symptoms may appear either at initiation of medi-
cation or after a modification or change in use.
Recording Procedures
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substanc e/medication-induced ob sessive-compulsive and
related disorder begins with the specific subs tance (e.g., cocaine) that is presumed to be
causing the obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms. The diagnostic code is selected
from the table included in the criteria set, wh ich is based on the drug class. For substances
that do not fit into any of the classes, the co de for “other substance” should be used; and in
cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of sub-
stance is unknown, the category “u nknown substance” should be used.
The name of the disorder is followed by the sp ecification of onset (i.e., onset during in-
toxication, onset during withdrawal, with onse t after medication use). Unlike the record-
ing procedures for ICD-10-CM, which combine the substance-induced disorder and
substance use disorder into a single code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code is
given for the substance use disorder. For exampl e, in the case of re petitive behaviors oc-
curring during intoxica tion in a man with a severe coca ine use disorder, the diagnosis is
292.89 cocaine-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, with onset during in-
toxication. An additional diagnosis of 304.20 severe cocaine use disorder is also given.
When more than one substance is judged to play a significant role in the development of
the obsessive-compulsive and related disord er, each should be listed separately.
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and re-
lated disorder begins with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine) that is presumed to be causing
the obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms. Th e diagnostic code is selected from the ta-
ble included in the criteria set,  which is based on the drug clas s and presence or absence of a
comorbid substance use disorder . For substances that do no t fit into any of the classes,
the code for “other substance” with no comorb id substance use should be used; and in cases in
which a substance is judged to be an etiological fa ctor but the specific class of substance is un-
known, the category “unknown substance” with  no comorbid substance use should be used.ICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CMWith use 
disorder, 
mildWith use 
disorder, 
moderate 
or severeWithout 
use 
disorder
Amphetamine (or other 
stimulant)292.89 F15.188 F15.288 F15.988
Cocaine 292.89 F14.188 F14.288 F14.988
Other (or unknown) substance 292.89 F19.188 F19.288 F19.988
Substance/Medication-Induced Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorder 259
When recording the name of the disorder, the comorbid substance use disorder (if any) is
listed first, followed by the wo rd “with,” followed by the name  of the substance-induced ob-
sessive-compulsive and related diso rder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset dur-
ing intoxication, onset during withdrawal, with  onset after medication use). For example, in
the case of repetitive behaviors occurring during  intoxication in a man with a severe cocaine
use disorder, the diagnosis is F14.288 severe co caine use disorder with cocaine-induced obses-
sive-compulsive and related disorder, with onse t during intoxication. A separate diagnosis of
the comorbid severe cocaine use disorder is not given. If the substance-induced obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after
a one-time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disorder is noted (e.g.,
F15.988 amphetamine-induced obsessive-compulsive  and related disorder, with onset during
intoxication). When more than on e substance is judged to play a significant role in the devel-
opment of the obsessive-compulsive and relate d disorder, each should be listed separately.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of substance/medicati on-induced obsessive-co mpulsive and related
disorder are prominent symptoms of an obsessive-compulsive  and related disorder (Criterion
A) that are judged to be attributable to the e ffects of a substance (e.g., drug of abuse, medica-
tion). The obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms must have developed during
or soon after substance intoxication or withdraw al or after exposure to a medication or toxin,
and the substance/medication must be capable of producing the symptoms (Criterion B). Sub-
stance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to a prescribed
treatment for a mental disorder or general medi cal condition must have its onset while the in-
dividual is receiving the medi cation. Once the treatment is discontinued, the obsessive-com-
pulsive and related disorder symp toms will usually improve or remit within days to several
weeks to 1 month (depending on the half-life of the substance/medica tion). The diagnosis of
substance/medication-induced obsessive-comp ulsive and related disorder should not be
given if onset of the obsessive-compulsive an d related disorder symp toms precedes the sub-
stance intoxicati on or medication use, or if the symp toms persist for a substantial period of
time, usually longer than 1 month,  from the time of severe into xication or with drawal. If the
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms persist for a substantial period of time,
other causes for the symptoms should be cons idered. The substance/medication-induced ob-
sessive-compulsive and related disorder diagnosis should be made in addition to a diagnosis
of substance intoxication only when the sympto ms in Criterion A pred ominate in the clinical
picture and are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Obsessions, compulsions, hair pulling, skin pick ing, or other body-focused repetitive be-
haviors can occur in association with intoxication with the following classes of substances:
stimulants (including cocaine) and other (o r unknown) substances. Heavy metals and tox-
ins may also cause obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms. Laboratory as-
sessments (e.g., urine toxicology) may be usef ul to measure substance intoxication as part
of an assessment for obsessive-co mpulsive and related disorders.
Prevalence
In the general population, the very limited data  that are available indicate that substance-
induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder is very rare. 
Differential Diagnosis
Substance intoxication. Obsessive-compulsive and relate d disorder symptoms may oc-
cur in substance intoxication. The diagnosis of  the substance-specific  intoxication will usu-
260 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
ally suffice to categorize the symptom presentation. A diagnosis of an obsessive-compulsive
and related disorder should be made in additi on to substance intoxication when the symp-
toms are judged to be in exce ss of those usually associated with intoxication and are suf-
ficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder (i.e., not induced by a substance). Sub-
stance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder is judged to be
etiologically related to the substance/medi cation. Substance/medi cation-induced obses-
sive-compulsive and related disorder is dist inguished from a prim ary obsessive-compul-
sive and related disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors with respect
to substances/medications. For drugs of abuse, there must be  evidence from the history,
physical examination, or laboratory findings  for use or intoxication. Substance/medica-
tion-induced obsessive-compulsiv e and related disorder arises only in association with in-
toxication, whereas a primary obsessive-compulsive and relate d disorder may precede the
onset of substance/medication use. The presence  of features that are atypical of a primary
obsessive-compulsive and relate d disorder, such as atypical age at onset of symptoms,
may suggest a substance-induced etiology. A primary obsessive-compulsive and related
disorder diagnosis is warranted if the sympto ms persist for a substa ntial period of time
(about 1 month or longer) after the end of the substance intoxication or the individual has
a history of an obsessive-co mpulsive and related disorder.
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition. If the
obsessive-compulsive and relate d disorder symptoms are attr ibutable to another medical
condition (i.e., rather than to the medication taken for the other me dical condition), obses-
sive-compulsive and related di sorder due to another medical condition should be diag-
nosed. The history often provides the basis for judgment. At times, a change in the
treatment for the other medical condition (e.g ., medication substitu tion or discontinua-
tion) may be needed to determine whether or not the medication is the causative agent (in
which case the symptoms may be better expl ained by substance/medication-induced ob-
sessive-compulsive and related diso rder). If the disturbance is attributable to both another
medical condition and substance use, both diagnoses (i.e., obsessive-compulsive and related
disorder due to another medical condition and substance/medicati on-induced obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder) may be given. When there is insufficie nt evidence to de-
termine whether the symptoms are attributable  to either a substanc e/medication or an-
other medical condition or are primary (i.e., a ttributable to neither a substance/medication
nor another medical condition), a diagnosis of other specified or unspecified obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder would be indicated.
Delirium. If obsessive-compulsive and related disorder symptoms occur exclusively
during the course of delirium, they are consid ered to be an associated  feature of the delir-
ium and are not diagnosed separately. 
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorder
Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria 294.8 (F06.8)
A. Obsessions, compulsions, preoccupations with appearance, hoarding, skin picking,
hair pulling, other body-focused repetitive beha viors, or other symptoms characteristic
of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder predominate in the clinical picture. 
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition. 
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder. 
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 261
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium. 
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With obsessive-compulsive disorder–like symptoms:  If obsessive-compulsive dis-
order–like symptoms predominate in the clinical presentation.
With appearance preoccupations:  If preoccupation with perceived appearance de-
fects or flaws predominates in the clinical presentation.
With hoarding symptoms: If hoarding predominates in the clinical presentation.
With hair-pulling symptoms:  If hair pulling predominates in the clinical presentation.
With skin-picking symptoms:  If skin picking predominates in the clinical presenta-
tion.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the mental
disorder (e.g., 294.8 [F06.8] obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to cerebral
infarction). The other medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately
before the obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to the medical condition (e.g.,
438.89 [I69.398] cerebral infarction; 294.8 [F06.8] obsessive-compulsive and related dis-
order due to cerebral infarction).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of obsessive-compulsive an d related disorder due to another medical
condition is clinically significant obsessiv e-compulsive and related symptoms that are
judged to be best explained as the direct pathophysiological consequence of another med-
ical condition. Symptoms can include pr ominent obsessions, compulsions, preoccu-
pations with appearance, hoarding, hair pull ing, skin picking, or other body-focused
repetitive behaviors (Criterion A). The judgme nt that the symptoms are best explained by
the associated medical condition must be based on evidence from the history, physical ex-
amination, or laboratory findings (Criterion B). Additionally, it must be judged that the
symptoms are not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion C). The diagno-
sis is not made if the obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms o ccur only during the
course of a delirium (Criterion D). The obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms must
cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa tional, or other impor-
tant areas of functioning (Criterion E).
In determining whether the ob sessive-compulsive and rela ted symptoms are attribut-
able to another medical condit ion, a relevant medical condition must be present. Further-
more, it must be established that obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms can be
etiologically related to the medical condit ion through a pathophysiological mechanism
and that this best explains the symptoms in the individual. Although there are no infallible
guidelines for determining whether the relationship between the obsessive-compulsive
and related symptoms and the medical conditio n is etiological, considerations that may
provide some guidance in making this diagno sis include the presence of a clear temporal
association between the onset, exacerbation, or remission of the medical condition and the
obsessive-compulsive and related symptoms; the presence of features that are atypical of
a primary obsessive-compulsive and related disord er (e.g., atypical age at onset or course);
and evidence in the literature that a known physiological mechanism (e.g., striatal dam-
age) causes obsessive-compulsive and rela ted symptoms. In addi tion, the disturbance
cannot be better explained by a primary obse ssive-compulsive and related disorder, a sub-
stance/medication-induced obsessive-compul sive and related disorder, or another men-
tal disorder.
There is some controversy about whether ob sessive-compulsive and related disorders
can be attributed to Group A streptococcal infection. Sydenham’s chorea is the neurolog-
262 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
ical manifestation of rheumatic fever, which is in turn due to Group A streptococcal in-
fection. Sydenham’s chorea is characterized by a combination of motor and nonmotor
features. Nonmotor feat ures include obsessions, compulsi ons, attention deficit, and emo-
tional lability. Although indi viduals with Sydenh am’s chorea may present with non-
neuropsychiatric features of acute rheumatic fe ver, such as carditis and arthritis, they may
present with obsessive-compu lsive disorder–like symptoms; such individuals should
be diagnosed with obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical
condition. 
Pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric diso rders associated with  streptococcal infec-
tions (PANDAS) has been identified as an other post-infectious autoimmune disorder
characterized by the sudden onset of obsessions, compulsions, and/or tics accompanied
by a variety of acute neuropsychiatric symptoms  in the absence of chorea, carditis, or ar-
thritis, after Group A streptoc occal infection. Although there is a body of evidence that
supports the existence of PANDAS, it remains a controversial diagnosis. Given this ongo-
ing controversy, the description of PANDAS ha s been modified to eliminate etiological
factors and to designate an expanded clinical  entity: pediatric acute-onset neuropsychiat-
ric syndrome (PANS) or idiopathic childhood  acute neuropsychiatric symptoms (CANS),
which deserves further study.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A number of other medical disorders are know n to include obsessive-compulsive and re-
lated symptoms as a manifestation. Examples  include disorders leading to striatal dam-
age, such as cerebral infarction.
Development and Course
The development and course of  obsessive-compulsive and rela ted disorder due to another
medical condition generally follows the course of the underlying illness. 
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory assessments and/or medical examinations are necessary to confirm the diag-
nosis of another medical condition.
Differential Diagnosis
Delirium. A separate diagnosis of obsessive-compul sive and related disorder due to an-
other medical condition is not given if the disturbance occurs exclusively during the
course of a delirium. Howeve r, a diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
due to another medical condition may be given in addition to a diagnosis of major neuro-
cognitive disorder (dementia) if the etiolo gy of the obsessive-compulsive symptoms is
judged to be a physiological consequence of the pathological process causing the dementia
and if obsessive-compulsive symptoms are a pr ominent part of the clinical presentation. 
Mixed presentation of symptoms (e.g., mood and obsessive-compulsive and related
disorder symptoms). If the presentation includes a mix of different types of symptoms,
the specific mental disorder due to another medical condition depends on which symp-
toms predominate in the clinical picture.
Substance/medication-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. If there
is evidence of recent or pr olonged substance use (including medications with psychoac-
tive effects), withdrawal from a substance, or exposure to a toxin, a substance/medication-
induced obsessive-compulsive and related diso rder should be considered. When a sub-
stance/medication-induced ob sessive-compulsive and related disorder is being diag-
nosed in relation to drugs of abuse, it may be  useful to obtain a urine or blood drug screen
Other Specified Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorder 263
or other appropriate laboratory evaluation. Symptoms that o ccur during or shortly after
(i.e., within 4 weeks of) substance intoxication  or withdrawal or after medication use may
be especially indicative of a substance/medi cation-induced obsessive-compulsive and re-
lated disorder, depending on the type, duration, or amount of the substance used.
Obsessive-compulsive and re lated disorders (primary). Obsessive-compulsive and re-
lated disorder due to another medical condition should be distinguished fr om a primary
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder. In primary mental disorders, no specific and
direct causative physiological mechanisms associated with a medical condition can be
demonstrated. Late age at onse t or atypical symptoms suggest the need for a thorough as-
sessment to rule out the diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to an-
other medical condition. 
Illness anxiety disorder. Illness anxiety disorder is charac terized by a preoccupation with
having or acquiring a serious illness. In the case of illness anxiety disorder, individuals
may or may not have diagnosed medical conditions.
Associated feature of another mental disorder. Obsessive-compulsive and related symp-
toms may be an associated feature of another mental disorder (e.g., schizophrenia, an-
orexia nervosa). 
Other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder or unspecified obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder. These diagnoses are given if it is unclear whether the
obsessive-compulsive and rela ted symptoms are primary, substance-induced, or due to
another medical condition.
Other Specified Obsessive-Compulsive
and Related Disorder
300.3 (F42)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of an obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet
the full criteria for any of the disorders in the obsessive-compulsive and related disorders
diagnostic class. The other specified obsessive -compulsive and related disorder category
is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that
the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific obsessive-compulsive and re-
lated disorder. This is done by recording “other specified obsessive-compulsive and relat-
ed disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “body-focused repetitive behavior
disorder”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1.Body dysmorphic–like disorder with actual flaws:  This is similar to body dysmor-
phic disorder except that the defects or flaws in physical appearance are clearly ob-
servable by others (i.e., they are more noticeable than “slight”). In such cases, the
preoccupation with these flaws is clearly excessive and causes significant impairment
or distress.
2.Body dysmorphic–like disorder  without repetitive behaviors: Presentations that
meet body dysmorphic disorder except that the individual has not performed repetitive
behaviors or mental acts in response to the appearance concerns. 
3.Body-focused repetitive behavior disorder:  This is characterized by recurrent body-
focused repetitive behaviors (e.g., nail biting, lip biting, cheek chewing) and repeated
attempts to decrease or stop the behaviors. These symptoms cause clinically significant
264 Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
distress or impairment in social, occupational , or other important areas of functioning
and are not better explained by trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder), excoriation (skin-
picking) disorder, stereotypic movement disorder, or nonsuicidal self-injury. 
4.Obsessional jealousy:  This is characterized by nondelusional preoccupation with a
partner’s perceived infidelity. The preoccupations may lead to repetitive behaviors or
mental acts in response to the infidelity concerns; they cause clinically significant dis-
tress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning; and
they are not better explained by another mental  disorder such as delusional disorder,
jealous type, or paranoid personality disorder. 
5.Shubo-kyofu: A variant of taijin kyofusho  (see “Glossary of Cultural Concepts of Dis-
tress” in the Appendix) that is similar to body dysmorphic disorder and is characterized
by excessive fear of having a bodily deformity.
6.Koro:  Related to dhat syndrome (see “Glossary of Cultural Concepts of Distress” in
the Appendix), an episode of sudden and intense anxiety that the penis (or the vulva
and nipples in females) will recede into the body, possibly leading to death.
7.Jikoshu-kyofu:  A variant of taijin kyofusho  (see “Glossary of Cultural Concepts of Dis-
tress” in the Appendix) characterized by fear of having an offensive body odor (also
termed olfactory reference syndrome).
Unspecified Obsessive-Compulsive
and Related Disorder
300.3 (F42)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of an obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, or other important ar eas of functioning predominate but do not meet
the full criteria for any of the disorders in the obsessive-compulsive and related disorders
diagnostic class. The unspecified obsessive-co mpulsive and related disorder category is
used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria
are not met for a specific obsessive-compul sive and related disorder, and includes presen-
tations in which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in
emergency room settings).