715Other Conditions That May Be
a Focus of Clinical Attention
This discussion  covers other conditions and proble ms that may be a focus of clini-
cal attention or that may otherwise affect the diagnosis, course, prog nosis, or treatment of
a patient’s mental disorder. These conditio ns are presented with their corresponding
codes from ICD-9-CM (usually  V codes) and ICD-10-CM (usu ally Z codes). A condition
or problem in this chapter may be coded if it  is a reason for the current visit or helps to
explain the need for a test, procedure, or trea tment. Conditions and problems in this chap-
ter may also be included in the medical record  as useful information on circumstances that
may affect the patient’s care, regardless of their relevance to the current visit.
The conditions and problems listed in this chapter are not mental disorders. Their in-
clusion in DSM-5 is meant to draw attention to  the scope of additional issues that may be
encountered in routine clinical practice and to provide a systematic listing that may be
useful to clinicians in documenting these issues.
Relational Problems
Key relationships, especially intimate adult partner relationships and parent/caregiver-
child relationships, have a significant impact on the health of the individuals in these re-
lationships. These relationships can be health  promoting and protective, neutral, or detri-
mental to health outcomes. In the extreme, th ese close relationships can be associated with
maltreatment or neglect, which has signif icant medical and psyc hological consequences
for the affected individual. A relational problem may come to clinical attention either as
the reason that the individual  seeks health care or as a pr oblem that affects the course,
prognosis, or treatment of the individual’s mental or other medical disorder.
Problems Related to Family Upbringing
V61.20 (Z62.820) Parent-Child Relational Problem
For this category, the term parent  is used to refer to one of the child’s primary caregivers,
who may be a biological, adoptive, or foster pa rent or may be another relative (such as a
grandparent) who fulfills a parent al role for the child. This ca tegory should be used when
the main focus of clinical atte ntion is to address the quality of the parent-child relationship
or when the quality of the parent-child relati onship is affecting th e course, prognosis, or
treatment of a mental or other medical disorder. Typically, the parent-child relational
problem is associated with impaired functionin g in behavioral, cognitive, or affective do-
mains. Examples of behavioral problems include inadequate parental control, supervision,
and involvement with the child; parental over protection; excessive parental pressure; ar-
guments that escalate to threats of physical violence; and avoidance without resolution of
problems. Cognitive problems may include negati ve attributions of th e other’s intentions,
hostility toward or scapegoating of the other,  and unwarranted feelings of estrangement.
Affective problems may include feelings of sadness, apathy, or anger about the other in-
dividual in the relationship. Clinicians should take into account the developmental needs
of the child and the cultural context.
716 Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
V61.8 (Z62.891) Sibling Relational Problem
This category should be used when the focus of  clinical attention is a pattern of interaction
among siblings that is associated with significan t impairment in individual or family function-
ing or with development of symptoms in one or more of the siblings, or when a sibling relational
problem is affecting the course, prognosis, or treatment of a sibling’s mental or other medical
disorder. This category can be used for either children or adults if the focus is on the sibling re-
lationship. Siblings in this context include fu ll, half-, step-, foster , and adopted siblings.
V61.8 (Z62.29) Upbringing Away From Parents
This category should be used when the main focus of clinical attention pertains to issues
regarding a child being raised away from the parents or when this separate upbringing af-
fects the course, prognosis, or treatment of a mental or other medical disorder. The child
could be one who is under state custody and pl aced in kin care or foster care. The child
could also be one who is living in a nonparenta l relative’s home, or with friends, but whose
out-of-home placement is not mandated or sanctioned by the courts. Problems related to a
child living in a group home or orphanage are also included. This category excludes issues
related to V60.6 (Z59.3) ch ildren in boarding schools.
V61.29 (Z62.898) Child Affected by Parental Relationship Distress
This category should be used when the focus of clinical attention is the negative effects of
parental relationship discord (e.g., high levels of conflict, distress, or disparagement) on a
child in the family, including effects on the child’s mental or other medical disorders.
Other Problems Related to  Primary Support Group
V61.10 (Z63.0) Relationship Distress With Spouse or Intimate Partner
This category should be used when the major fo cus of the clinical contact is to address the
quality of the intimate (spouse or partner) relationship or when the quality of that rela-
tionship is affecting the course, prognosis, or  treatment of a mental or other medical dis-
order. Partners can be of the same or differ ent genders. Typically, the relationship distress
is associated with impaired functioning in beha vioral, cognitive, or affective domains. Ex-
amples of behavioral proble ms include conflict resolution difficulty, withdrawal, and
overinvolvement. Cognit ive problems can manifest as chronic negative attributions of the
other’s intentions or dismissals of the part ner’s positive behaviors. Affective problems
would include chronic sadness, apathy, and/or anger about the other partner.
Note:  This category excludes clinical encounte rs for V61.1x (Z69.1x) mental health ser-
vices for spousal or partner abuse prob lems and V65.49 (Z70.9) sex counseling.
V61.03 (Z63.5) Disruption of Family by  Separation or Divorce
This category should be used when partners in  an intimate adult couple are living apart
due to relationship problems or are in the process of divorce.
V61.8 (Z63.8) High Expressed Emotion Level Within Family
Expressed emotion  is a construct used as a qualitat ive measure of the “amount” of emo-
tion—in particular, hostility, emotional overin volvement, and criticism directed toward a
family member who is an identified patient—displayed in the family environment. This
category should be used when a family’s hi gh level of expressed emotion is the focus of
clinical attention or is affecting the course, prognosis, or treatment of a family member’s
mental or other medical disorder.
V62.82 (Z63.4) Uncomplicated Bereavement
This category can be used when the focus of cl inical attention is a normal reaction to the
death of a loved one. As part of their reaction to such a loss, some grieving individuals
present with symptoms characteristic of a major depressive episode—for example, feel-
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention 717
ings of sadness and associated symptoms su ch as insomnia, poor appetite, and weight
loss. The bereaved individual typically re gards the depressed mood as “normal,” al-
though the individual may seek professional  help for relief of associated symptoms such
as insomnia or anorexia. The duration and expression of “normal” bereavement vary con-
siderably among different cultural groups. Fu rther guidance in distinguishing grief from
a major depressive episode is provided in the criteria for major depressive episode.
Abuse and Neglect
Maltreatment by a family member (e.g., caregiver, intimate adult partner) or by a nonrel-
ative can be the area of current clinical focu s, or such maltreatment  can be an important
factor in the assessment and treatment of pati ents with mental or other medical disorders.
Because of the legal implications of abuse and neglect, care should be used in assessing
these conditions and assigning these codes. Ha ving a past history of abuse or neglect can
influence diagnosis and treatment response in a number of mental disorders, and may also
be noted along with the diagnosis.
For the following categories, in addition to listings of the confirmed or suspected event
of abuse or neglect, other code s are provided for use if the cu rrent clinical encounter is to
provide mental health services to either the victim or the perpetrator of the abuse or ne-
glect. A separate code is also provided for designating a past history of abuse or neglect.
Coding Note for ICD-10-CM Abuse and Neglect Conditions
For T codes only, the 7th character should be coded as follows:
A (initial encounter) —Use while the patient is receiving active treatment for
the condition (e.g., surgical treatment, emergency department encounter, eval-
uation and treatment by a new clinician); or
D (subsequent encounter) —Use for encounters after the patient has received
active treatment for the condition and wh en he or she is receiving routine care
for the condition during the healing or re covery phase (e.g., cast change or re-
moval, removal of external or internal fixation device, medi cation adjustment,
other aftercare and follow-up visits).
Child Maltreatment and Neglect Problems
Child Physical Abuse
Child physical abuse is nonaccidental physical injury to a child—ranging from minor bruises
to severe fractures or death—occurring as a re sult of punching, beating, kicking, biting,
shaking, throwing, stabbing, choking, hitting (with a hand, stick, strap, or other object),
burning, or any other method that is inflicted by a parent, caregiver, or other individual who
has responsibility for the child. Such injury is  considered abuse regardless of whether the
caregiver intended to hurt the ch ild. Physical discipline, such as  spanking or paddling, is not
considered abuse as long as it is reasonable  and causes no bodily  injury to the child.
Child Physical Abuse, Confirmed
995.54 (T74.12XA) Initial encounter
995.54 (T74.12XD) Subsequent encounter
Child Physical Abuse, Suspected
995.54 (T76.12XA) Initial encounter
995.54 (T76.12XD) Subsequent encounter
718 Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Other Circumstances Related to Child Physical Abuse
V61.21 (Z69.010) Encounter for mental health services for victim of child abuse by parent
V61.21 (Z69.020) Encounter for mental health servic es for victim of nonparental child
abuse
V15.41 (Z62.810) Personal history (past history) of physical abuse in childhood
V61.22 (Z69.011) Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of parental child
abuse
V62.83 (Z69.021) Encounter for mental health servic es for perpetrator of nonparental
child abuse
Child Sexual Abuse
Child sexual abuse encompasses any sexual act involving a child that is intended to pro-
vide sexual gratification to a parent, caregi ver, or other individual who has responsibility
for the child. Sexual abuse includes activities such as fondling a child’s genitals, penetra-
tion, incest, rape, sodomy, and indecent exposure. Sexual abuse also includes noncontact
exploitation of a child by a parent or caregi ver—for example, forcing, tricking, enticing,
threatening, or pressuring a child to participate in acts for the sexual gratification of others,
without direct physical contact between child and abuser.
Child Sexual Abuse, Confirmed
995.53 (T74.22XA) Initial encounter
995.53 (T74.22XD) Subsequent encounter
Child Sexual Abuse, Suspected
995.53 (T76.22XA) Initial encounter
995.53 (T76.22XD) Subsequent encounter
Other Circumstances Related to Child Sexual Abuse
V61.21 (Z69.010) Encounter for mental health services  for victim of child sexual abuse
by parent
V61.21 (Z69.020) Encounter for mental health servic es for victim of nonparental child
sexual abuse
V15.41 (Z62.810) Personal history (past history)  of sexual abuse in childhood
V61.22 (Z69.011) Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of parental child
sexual abuse
V62.83 (Z69.021) Encounter for mental health servic es for perpetrator of nonparental
child sexual abuse
Child Neglect
Child neglect is defined as any confirmed or suspected egregious ac t or omission by a
child’s parent or other caregiver that deprives  the child of basic age-appropriate needs and
thereby results, or has reasonab le potential to result, in physical or psychological harm to
the child. Child neglect encompasses abandonm ent; lack of appropriate supervision; fail-
ure to attend to necessary em otional or psychological needs;  and failure to provide neces-
sary education, medical care, nouris hment, shelter, and/or clothing.
Child Neglect, Confirmed
995.52 (T74.02XA) Initial encounter
995.52 (T74.02XD) Subsequent encounter
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention 719
Child Neglect, Suspected
995.52 (T76.02XA) Initial encounter
995.52 (T76.02XD) Subsequent encounter
Other Circumstances Related to Child Neglect
V61.21 (Z69.010) Encounter for mental health servic es for victim of child neglect by
parent
V61.21 (Z69.020) Encounter for mental health servic es for victim of nonparental child
neglect
V15.42 (Z62.812) Personal history (past history) of neglect in childhood
V61.22 (Z69.011) Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of parental child
neglect
V62.83 (Z69.021) Encounter for mental health servic es for perpetrator of nonparental
child neglect
Child Psychological Abuse
Child psychological abuse is nonaccidental verb al or symbolic acts by a child’s parent or
caregiver that result, or have reasonable potential to result, in significant psychological
harm to the child. (Physical and sexual abusive acts are not included in this category.) Ex-
amples of psychological abuse of a child include berating, disparaging, or humiliating
the child; threatening the child; harming/abandoning—or indicating that the alleged
offender will harm/abandon—people or things  that the child cares about; confining the
child (as by tying a child’s arms or legs togeth er or binding a child to furniture or another
object, or confining a child to a small enclosed  area [e.g., a closet]); egregious scapegoating
of the child; coercing the child to inflict pain  on himself or herself; and disciplining the
child excessively (i.e., at an extremely high fr equency or duration, even if not at a level of
physical abuse) through physical or nonphysical means.
Child Psychological Abuse, Confirmed
995.51 (T74.32XA) Initial encounter
995.51 (T74.32XD) Subsequent encounter
Child Psychological Abuse, Suspected
995.51 (T76.32XA) Initial encounter
995.51 (T76.32XD) Subsequent encounter
Other Circumstances Related to Child Psychological Abuse
V61.21 (Z69.010) Encounter for mental health services  for victim of child psychological
abuse by parent
V61.21 (Z69.020) Encounter for mental health servic es for victim of nonparental child
psychological abuse
V15.42 (Z62.811) Personal history (past history) of psychological abuse in childhood
V61.22 (Z69.011) Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of parental child
psychological abuse
V62.83 (Z69.021) Encounter for mental health servic es for perpetrator of nonparental
child psychological abuse
720 Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Adult Maltreatment and Neglect Problems
Spouse or Partner Violence, Physical
This category should be used when nonaccidental acts of physical force that result, or have
reasonable potential to result, in physical harm  to an intimate partner or that evoke signif-
icant fear in the partner have occurred during  the past year. Nonaccidental acts of physical
force include shoving, slapping, hair pulling, pinching, restraining, shaking, throwing,
biting, kicking, hitting with the fist or an ob ject, burning, poisoning,  applying force to the
throat, cutting off the air supply, holding th e head under water, and using a weapon. Acts
for the purpose of physically protecting oneself or one’s partner are excluded.
Spouse or Partner Violen ce, Physical, Confirmed
995.81 (T74.11XA) Initial encounter
995.81 (T74.11XD) Subsequent encounter
Spouse or Partner Violence, Physical, Suspected
995.81 (T76.11XA) Initial encounter
995.81 (T76.11XD) Subsequent encounter
Other Circumstances Related to Spou se or Partner Violence, Physical
V61.11 (Z69.11) Encounter for mental health services  for victim of spouse or partner
violence, physical
V15.41 (Z91.410) Personal history (past history) of spouse or partner violence, physical
V61.12 (Z69.12) Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of spouse or
partner violence, physical
Spouse or Partner Violence, Sexual
This category should be used when forced or coerced sexual acts with an intimate partner
have occurred during the past year. Sexual violence may involve the use of physical force
or psychological coercion to compel the partner to engage in a sexual act against his or her
will, whether or not the act is completed. Also  included in this category are sexual acts
with an intimate partner who is unable to consent.
Spouse or Partner Violence, Sexual, Confirmed
995.83 (T74.21XA) Initial encounter
995.83 (T74.21XD) Subsequent encounter
Spouse or Partner Violence, Sexual, Suspected
995.83 (T76.21XA) Initial encounter
995.83 (T76.21XD) Subsequent encounter
Other Circumstances Related to Sp ouse or Partner Violence, Sexual
V61.11 (Z69.81) Encounter for mental health services  for victim of spouse or partner
violence, sexual
V15.41 (Z91.410) Personal history (past history) of spouse or partner violence, sexual
V61.12 (Z69.12) Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of spouse or
partner violence, sexual
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention 721
Spouse or Partner Neglect
Partner neglect is any egregious act or omission  in the past year by one partner that de-
prives a dependent partner of basic needs and thereby results, or has reasonable potential
to result, in physical or psycho logical harm to the dependent pa rtner. This category is used
in the context of relationships in which one partner is extremely dependent on the other
partner for care or for assistance in navigating ordinary daily activities—for example, a
partner who is incapable of self-care owing to substantial physical, psychological/intel-
lectual, or cultural limitations  (e.g., inability to communicat e with others and manage ev-
eryday activities due to living in a foreign culture).
Spouse or Partner Neglect, Confirmed
995.85 (T74.01XA) Initial encounter
995.85 (T74.01XD) Subsequent encounter
Spouse or Partner Neglect, Suspected
995.85 (T76.01XA) Initial encounter
995.85 (T76.01XD) Subsequent encounter
Other Circumstances Related to Spouse or Partner Neglect
V61.11 (Z69.11) Encounter for mental health services  for victim of spouse or partner
neglect
V15.42 (Z91.412) Personal history (past history) of spouse or partner neglect
V61.12 (Z69.12) Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of spouse or
partner neglect
Spouse or Partner Abuse, Psychological
Partner psychological abuse encompasses nonaccidental verbal or symbolic acts by one
partner that result, or have reasonable potentia l to result, in significant harm to the other
partner. This category should  be used when such psycholo gical abuse has occurred during
the past year. Acts of psycholo gical abuse include berating or  humiliating the victim; inter-
rogating the victim; restricting the victim’s ability to come and go freely; obstructing the vic-
tim’s access to assistance (e.g., law enforcemen t; legal, protective, or medical resources);
threatening the victim with physical harm or sexual assault; harming, or threatening to
harm, people or things that th e victim cares about; unwarranted restriction of the victim’s ac-
cess to or use of economic resources; isolating the victim from family, friends, or social sup-
port resources; stalking the victim; and trying to make the victim think that he or she is crazy.
Spouse or Partner Abuse, Psychological, Confirmed
995.82 (T74.31XA) Initial encounter
995.82 (T74.31XD) Subsequent encounter
Spouse or Partner Abuse, Psychological, Suspected
995.82 (T76.31XA) Initial encounter
995.82 (T76.31XD) Subsequent encounter
Other Circumstances Related to Spouse or Partner Abuse, Psychological
V61.11 (Z69.11) Encounter for mental health services  for victim of spouse or partner
psychological abuse
722 Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
V15.42 (Z91.411) Personal history (past history) of sp ouse or partner psychological abuse
V61.12 (Z69.12) Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of spouse or part-
ner psychological abuse
Adult Abuse by Nons pouse or Nonpartner
These categories should be used when an ad ult has been abused by another adult who is
not an intimate partner. Such maltreatment may involve acts of physical, sexual, or emo-
tional abuse. Examples of adult abuse include nonaccidental acts of physical force (e.g.,
pushing/shoving, scratching, slapping, thro wing something that could hurt, punching,
biting) that have resulted—o r have reasonable potential to  result—in physical harm or
have caused significant fear; forced or coer ced sexual acts; and ve rbal or symbolic acts
with the potential to cause psychological harm  (e.g., berating or humiliating the person;
interrogating the person; restricting the person ’s ability to come and go freely; obstructing
the person’s access to assistance; threatening the person; harming or threatening to harm
people or things that the person cares about; restricting the person’s access to or use of eco-
nomic resources; isolating the person from fa mily, friends, or social support resources;
stalking the person; trying to make the person think that he or she is crazy). Acts for the
purpose of physically protecting oneself or the other person are excluded.
Adult Physical Abuse by Nonspouse or Nonpartner, Confirmed
995.81 (T74.11XA) Initial encounter
995.81 (T74.11XD) Subsequent encounter
Adult Physical Abuse by Nonspouse or Nonpartner, Suspected
995.81 (T76.11XA) Initial encounter
995.81 (T76.11XD) Subsequent encounter
Adult Sexual Abuse by Nonspo use or Nonpartner, Confirmed
995.83 (T74.21XA) Initial encounter
995.83 (T74.21XD) Subsequent encounter
Adult Sexual Abuse by Nonspo use or Nonpartn er, Suspected
995.83 (T76.21XA) Initial encounter
995.83 (T76.21XD) Subsequent encounter
Adult Psychological Abuse by Nonspouse or Nonpartner, Confirmed
995.82 (T74.31XA) Initial encounter
995.82 (T74.31XD) Subsequent encounter
Adult Psychological Abuse by Nonspouse or Nonpartner, Suspected
995.82 (T76.31XA) Initial encounter
995.82 (T76.31XD) Subsequent encounter
Other Circumstances Related to Adult Abuse by Nonspouse or Nonpartner
V65.49 (Z69.81) Encounter for mental health services  for victim of nonspousal or non-
partner adult abuse
V62.83 (Z69.82) Encounter for mental health services  for perpetrator of nonspousal or
nonpartner adult abuse
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention 723
Educational and Occu pational Problems
Educational Problems
V62.3 (Z55.9) Academic or Educational Problem
This category should be used when an academic or educational problem is the focus of
clinical attention or has an impact on the in dividual’s diagnosis, tr eatment, or prognosis.
Problems to be consider ed include illiteracy or low-level lit eracy; lack of access to school-
ing owing to unavailability or unattainability;  problems with academ ic performance (e.g.,
failing school examinations, receiving failing marks or grades) or underachievement (be-
low what would be expected given the indivi dual’s intellectual capacity); discord with
teachers, school staff, or other students; an d any other problems related to education and/
or literacy.
Occupational Problems
V62.21 (Z56.82) Problem Related to Current Military Deployment Status
This category should be used when an occupa tional problem directly related to an indi-
vidual’s military deployment status is the focus of  clinical attention or has an impact on the
individual’s diagnosis, treatment, or prognosi s. Psychological reactions to deployment are
not included in this category; such reactions would be better captured as an adjustment
disorder or another mental disorder.
V62.29 (Z56.9) Other Problem Related to Employment
This category should be used when an occupational problem is the focus of clinical atten-
tion or has an impact on the individual’s treatment or prog nosis. Areas to be considered
include problems with employment or in the work environment, including unemploy-
ment; recent change of job; threat of job loss; job dissatisfaction; stressful work schedule;
uncertainty about career choices; sexual ha rassment on the job; other discord with boss,
supervisor, co-workers, or others in the wo rk environment; uncongenial or hostile work
environments; other psychosocial stressors re lated to work; and any other problems re-
lated to employment and/or occupation.
Housing and Economic Problems
Housing Problems
V60.0 (Z59.0) Homelessness
This category should be used when lack of a regular dwelling or living quarters has an im-
pact on an individual’s treatment or prognosi s. An individual is considered to be homeless
if his or her primary nighttime residence is a homeless shelter, a warming shelter, a do-
mestic violence shelter, a public space (e.g., tunnel, transportation st ation, mall), a build-
ing not intended for residential use (e.g., abandoned structure, unused factory), a
cardboard box or cave, or some other ad hoc housing situation.
V60.1 (Z59.1) Inadequate Housing
This category should be used when lack of adequate housing has an impact on an individ-
ual’s treatment or prognosis. Examples of in adequate housing conditions include lack of
heat (in cold temperatures) or electricity, infestation by insects or rodents, inadequate
plumbing and toilet facilities , overcrowding, lack of adequa te sleeping space, and exces-
sive noise. It is important to consider cultural norms before assigning this category.
V60.89 (Z59.2) Discord With Neighbor, Lodger, or Landlord
This category should be used when discord with  neighbors, lodgers, or a landlord is a fo-
cus of clinical attention or has an impact on the individual’s treatment or prognosis.
724 Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
V60.6 (Z59.3) Problem Related to Living in a Residential Institution
This category should be used when a problem (or problems) related to living in a residen-
tial institution is a focus of clinical attention or has an impact on the individual’s treatment
or prognosis. Psychological reactions to a chan ge in living situation are not included in this
category; such reactions would be better  captured as an adjustment disorder.
Economic Problems
V60.2 (Z59.4) Lack of Adequate Food or Safe Drinking Water
V60.2 (Z59.5) Extreme Poverty
V60.2 (Z59.6) Low Income
V60.2 (Z59.7) Insufficient Social Insurance or Welfare Support
This category should be used for individuals wh o meet eligibility criter ia for social or wel-
fare support but ar e not receiving such support, who rece ive support that is insufficient to
address their needs, or who otherwise lack access to needed insurance or support pro-
grams. Examples include inability to qualify for welfare support owing to lack of proper
documentation or evidence of address, inability to obtain ad equate health insurance be-
cause of age or a preexisting condition, and denial of support owing to excessively strin-
gent income or other requirements.
V60.9  (Z59.9) Unspecified Housing or  Economic Problem
This category should be used when there is a problem related to hou sing or economic cir-
cumstances other than as specified above.
Other Problems Related to the Social Environment
V62.89 (Z60.0) Phase of Life Problem
This category should be used when a problem adjusting to a life-cycle transition (a partic-
ular developmental phase) is the focus of clinic al attention or has an impact on the indi-
vidual’s treatment or prognosis. Examples of such transitions include entering or
completing school, leaving parental control, getting married, starting a new career, be-
coming a parent, adjusting to an “empty ne st” after children leave home, and retiring.
V60.3 (Z60.2) Problem Related to Living Alone
This category should be used when a problem associated with living alone is the focus of
clinical attention or has an impact on the in dividual’s treatment or prognosis. Examples of
such problems include chronic feelings of lonelin ess, isolation, and lack of structure in car-
rying out activities of daily living (e.g., i rregular meal and sleep schedules, inconsistent
performance of home maintenance chores).
V62.4 (Z60.3) Acculturation Difficulty
This category should be used when difficulty in adjusting to a new culture (e.g., following
migration) is the focus of clinical attention or  has an impact on the individual’s treatment
or prognosis.
V62.4 (Z60.4) Social Exclusion or Rejection
This category should be used when there is an  imbalance of social power such that there is
recurrent social exclusion or rejection by others. Examples of social rejection include bul-
lying, teasing, and intimidation by others; be ing targeted by others for verbal abuse and
humiliation; and being purposefully excluded fr om the activities of peers, workmates, or
others in one’s social environment.
V62.4 (Z60.5) Target of (Perceived) Adverse Discrimination or Persecution
This category should be used when there is perceived or experienced discrimination
against or persecution of the individual based on his or her membership (or perceived
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention 725
membership) in a specific category. Typically , such categories include gender or gender
identity, race, ethnicity, religion,  sexual orientation, country of  origin, political beliefs, dis-
ability status, caste, social status , weight, and physical appearance.
V62.9 (Z60.9) Unspecified Problem Related to Social Environment
This category should be used when there is a pr oblem related to the individual’s social en-
vironment other than as specified above.
Problems Related to Crime or Interaction
 With the Legal System
V62.89 (Z65.4)   Victim of Crime
V62.5 (Z65.0) Conviction in Civil or Criminal Proceedings Without Imprisonment
V62.5 (Z65.1) Imprisonment or Other Incarceration
V62.5 (Z65.2) Problems Related to Release From Prison
V62.5 (Z65.3) Problems Related to Other Legal Circumstances
Other Health Service Encounters for
Counseling and Medical Advice
V65.49 (Z70.9) Sex Counseling
This category should be used when the indi vidual seeks counseling related to sex educa-
tion, sexual behavior, sexual orientation, sexual attitudes (embarrassment, timidity), oth-
ers’ sexual behavior or orientation (e.g., spou se, partner, child), sexu al enjoyment, or any
other sex-related issue.
V65.40 (Z71.9) Other Counseling or Consultation
This category should be used when counseling is provided or advice/consultation is
sought for a problem that is not specified above or elsewhere in this chapter. Examples in-
clude spiritual or religious counseling, dietar y counseling, and counseling on nicotine use.
Problems Related to Other Psychosocial, Personal,
and Environmental Circumstances
V62.89 (Z65.8) Religious or Spiritual Problem
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is a religious or spiritual
problem. Examples include distressing experi ences that involve lo ss or questioning of
faith, problems associated with conversion to a new faith, or questioning of spiritual val-
ues that may not necessarily be related to an organized church or religious institution.
V61.7 (Z64.0) Problems Related to Unwanted Pregnancy
V61.5 (Z64.1) Problems Related to Multiparity
V62.89 (Z64.4) Discord With Social Service Provider, Including Probation Officer,
Case Manager, or Social Services Worker
V62.89 (Z65.4) Victim of Terrorism or Torture
V62.22 (Z65.5) Exposure to Disaster, War, or Other Hostilities
V62.89 (Z65.8) Other Problem Related to Psychosocial Circumstances
V62.9 (Z65.9) Unspecified Problem Related to Un specified Psychosocial Circum-
stances
726 Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention
Other Circumstances of Personal History
V15.49 (Z91.49) Other Personal History of Psychological Trauma
V15.59 (Z91.5) Personal History of Self-Harm
V62.22 (Z91.82) Personal History of Military Deployment
V15.89 (Z91.89) Other Personal Risk Factors
V69.9 (Z72.9) Problem Related to Lifestyle
This category should be used when a lifestyle pr oblem is a specific focus of treatment or di-
rectly affects the course, prognosis, or treatmen t of a mental or other medical disorder. Ex-
amples of lifestyle problems include lack of physical exercise, inappropriate diet, high-risk
sexual behavior, and poor sleep hygiene. A prob lem that is attributable to a symptom of a
mental disorder should not be coded unless that problem is a specific focus of treatment or
directly affects the course, prognosis, or treatmen t of the individual. In such cases, both the
mental disorder and the lifesty le problem should be coded.
V71.01 (Z72.811) Adult Antisocial Behavior
This category can be used when the focus of c linical attention is adult antisocial behavior
that is not due to a mental disorder (e.g., conduct disorder , antisocial personality disor-
der). Examples include the behavior of some pr ofessional thieves, racketeers, or dealers in
illegal substances.
V71.02 (Z72.810) Child or Adolescent Antisocial Behavior
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is antisocial behavior in a
child or adolescent that is no t due to a mental disorder (e.g ., intermittent explosive disor-
der, conduct disorder). Examples include isol ated antisocial acts by children or adoles-
cents (not a pattern of antisocial behavior).
Problems Related to Access to Medical 
and Other Health Care
V63.9 (Z75.3) Unavailability or Inaccessibility of Health Care Facilities
V63.8 (Z75.4) Unavailability or Inaccessibility of Other Helping Agencies
Nonadherence to Medical Treatment
V15.81 (Z91.19) Nonadherence to Medical Treatment
This category can be used when the focus of clinical attention is nonadherence to an im-
portant aspect of treatment for a mental diso rder or another medica l condition. Reasons
for such nonadherence may include discomfort  resulting from treatment (e.g., medication
side effects), expense of treatment, personal value judgments or religious or cultural be-
liefs about the proposed treatment, age-related debility, and the presence of a mental dis-
order (e.g., schizophrenia, personality disorder ). This category should be used only when
the problem is sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention and does not
meet diagnostic criteria fo r psychological factors affect ing other medical conditions.
278.00 (E66.9) Overweight or Obesity
This category may be used when overweight or  obesity is a focus of clinical attention.
V65.2 (Z76.5) Malingering
The essential feature of malingering is the inte ntional production of false or grossly exag-
gerated physical or psychologi cal symptoms, motivated by external incentives such as
avoiding military duty, avoiding work, obta ining financial compensation, evading crimi-
nal prosecution, or obtaining drugs. Under some circumstances, malingering may repre-
Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention 727
sent adaptive behavior—for example, feigni ng illness while a captive of the enemy during
wartime. Malingering should be strongly suspected if any combination of the following is
noted:
1. Medicolegal context of presentation (e.g., th e individual is referred by an attorney to
the clinician for examination, or the indivi dual self-refers while litigation or criminal
charges are pending).
2. Marked discrepancy between the individual’s  claimed stress or disability and the ob-
jective findings and observations.
3. Lack of cooperation during the diagnostic evaluation and in complying with the pre-
scribed treatment regimen.
4. The presence of antisocial personality disorder.
Malingering differs from factitious disorder  in that the motiva tion for the symptom
production in malingering is an external ince ntive, whereas in factit ious disorder external
incentives are absent. Malingering is differen tiated from conversion  disorder and somatic
symptom–related mental disorders by the inte ntional production of symptoms and by the
obvious external incentives assoc iated with it. Definite evidence of feigning (such as clear
evidence that loss of function is present du ring the examination but not at home) would
suggest a diagnosis of factitious  disorder if the individual’s apparent aim is to assume the
sick role, or malingering if it is to obtain an incentive, such as money.
V40.31 (Z91.83) Wandering Associated With a Mental Disorder
This category is used for individuals with a mental disorder whose desire to walk about
leads to significant clinical management or safety concerns. For example, individuals with
major neurocognitive or neurodevelopmental disorders may experience  a restless urge to
wander that places them at risk for falls and causes them to leave supervised settings with-
out needed accompaniment. This category excl udes individuals whose intent is to escape
an unwanted housing situation (e.g., childre n who are running away from home, patients
who no longer wish to remain in the hospital) or those who walk or pace as a result of med-
ication-induced akathisia.
Coding note: First code associated mental disorder  (e.g., major neurocognitive disor-
der, autism spectrum disorder), then co de V40.31 (Z91.83) wandering associated with
[specific mental disorder].
V62.89 (R41.83) Borderline Intellectual Functioning
This category can be used when an individual’s borderline intellectual functioning is the fo-
cus of clinical attention or has an impact on the individual’s treatmen t or prognosis. Differ-
entiating borderline intellectual functioning and mild intellectual disability (intellectual
developmental disorder) requires careful asse ssment of intellectual and adaptive functions
and their discrepanc ies, particularly in the presence of co-occurring mental disorders that
may affect patient compliance with standardized  testing procedures (e.g., schizophrenia or
attention-deficit/hyperactivity diso rder with severe impulsivity).
This page intentionally left blank 
SECTION III
Emerging Measures and Models
Assessment Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .733
Cross-Cutting Symptom Measures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .734
DSM-5 Self-Rated Level 1 Cross-Cutting 
Symptom Measure—Adult. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .738
Parent/Guardian-Rated DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting 
Symptom Measure—Child Age 6–17  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .740
Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psycho sis Symptom Severity . . . . . .742
World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0 
(WHODAS 2.0) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .745
Cultural Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .749
Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .750
Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI)—Informant Version . . . . . . . . . .755
Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .761
Conditions for Further Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .783
Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .783
Depressive Episodes With Short-Duration Hypomania  . . . . . . . . . . .786
Persistent Complex Bereavement Disorder  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .789
Caffeine Use Disorder. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .792
Internet Gaming Disorder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .795
Neurobehavioral Disorder Associated With 
Prenatal Alcohol Exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .798
Suicidal Behavior Disorder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .801
Nonsuicidal Self-Injury . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .803
This page intentionally left blank 
This section  contains tools and techniques to enhance the clinical deci-
sion-making process, understand the cultural context of mental disorders, and
recognize emerging diagnoses for further study. It provides strategies to en-
hance clinical practice and new criteria to stimulate future research, represent-
ing a dynamic DSM-5 that will evolve with advances in the field.
Among the tools in Section III is a Level 1 cross-cutting self/informant-rated
measure that serves as a review of systems across mental disorders. A clini-
cian-rated severity scale for schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders also
is provided, as well as the World He alth Organization Disability Assessment
Schedule, Version 2 (WHODAS 2.0). Level 2 severity measures are available
online (www.psychiatry.org/dsm5) and may be used to explore significant re-
sponses to the Level 1 screen. A comprehensive review of the cultural context
of mental disorders, and the Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI) for clinical use,
are provided. 
Proposed disorders for future study are provided, which include a new
model for the diagnosis of personality disorders as an alternative to the estab-
lished diagnostic criteria; the proposed m odel incorporates impairments in per-
sonality functioning as well as pathological personality traits. Also included are
new conditions that are the focus of active research, such as attenuated psy-
chosis syndrome and nonsuicidal self-injury.
This page intentionally left blank 
733 Assessment
 Measures
A growing body  of scientific evidence favors dimensional concepts in the diagnosis
of mental disorders. The limitations of a cate gorical approach to diagnosis include the fail-
ure to find zones of rarity between diagnoses (i.e., delineation of mental disorders from one
another by natural boundaries), the need for in termediate categories like schizoaffective dis-
order, high rates of comorbidity, frequent not-otherwise-specified (NOS) diagnoses, relative
lack of utility in furthering the identification  of unique antecedent validators for most men-
tal disorders, and lack of treatment specif icity for the various di agnostic categories.
From both clinical and research perspectiv es, there is a need for a more dimensional
approach that can be combined with DSM’s se t of categorical diagnoses. Such an approach
incorporates variations of features within an in dividual (e.g., differential severity of indi-
vidual symptoms both within and outside of a disorder’s diagnostic  criteria as measured
by intensity, duration, or number of symptoms , along with other features such as type and
severity of disabilities) rather than relying on a simple yes-or-no approach. For diagnoses
for which all symptoms are needed  for a diagnosis (a monothetic  criteria set), different se-
verity levels of the constituent symptoms may be noted. If a threshold endorsement of
multiple symptoms is needed, su ch as at least five of nine symptoms for major depressive
disorder (a polythetic criteria  set), both severity levels and different combinations of the
criteria may identify more ho mogeneous diagnostic groups.
A dimensional approach depending primarily on an individual’s subjective reports of
symptom experiences along with the clinician’s interpretation is consistent with current
diagnostic practice. It is expected that as  our understanding of basic disease mechanisms
based on pathophysiology, neurocircuitry, ge ne-environment interactions, and laboratory
tests increases, approaches that integrate both objective and subjective patient data will be
developed to supplement and enhance the accuracy of the diagnostic process.
Cross-cutting symptom measures modeled on general medicine’s review of systems can
serve as an approach for reviewing critical psychopathological domains. The general med-
ical review of systems is crucial to detecting subtle changes in different organ systems that
can facilitate diagnosis and treatment. A simi lar review of various mental functions can
aid in a more comprehensive mental status assessment by drawing attention to symptoms
that may not fit neatly into the diagnostic cr iteria suggested by the individual’s presenting
symptoms, but may nonetheless be important to the individual’s care. The cross-cutting
measures have two levels: Level 1 questions ar e a brief survey of 13 symptom domains for
adult patients and 12 domains for child and ad olescent patients. Level 2 questions provide
a more in-depth assessment of certain domains. These measures were developed to be
administered both at initial interview and ov er time to track the patient’s symptom status
and response to treatment.
Severity measures  are disorder-specific, corresponding closely to the criteria that consti-
tute the disorder definition. They may be ad ministered to individuals who have received
a diagnosis or who have a clinically signific ant syndrome that falls short of meeting full
criteria for a diagnosis. Some of the assess ments are self-completed by the individual,
while others require a clinician to complete . As with the cross-cutting symptom measures,
these measures were developed to be administered both at initial interview and over time
to track the severity of the individual’s disorder and response to treatment.
734 Assessment Measures
The World Health Organization  Disability Assessment Schedule , Version 2.0 (WHODAS 2.0)
was developed to assess a patient’s ability to perform activities in six areas: understanding
and communicating; getting around; self-care; getting along with people; life activities
(e.g., household, work/school); and participat ion in society. The scale is self-administered
and was developed to be used in patients with any medical disorder. It corresponds to
concepts contained in the WH O International Classification  of Functioning, Disability
and Health. This assessment can also be used over time to track changes in a patient’s dis-
abilities.
This chapter focuses on the DSM-5 Leve l 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure (adult
self-rated and parent/guardian versions); the Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis
Symptom Severity; and the WHODAS 2.0. Cl inician instructions, scoring information,
and interpretation guidelines are included  for each. These measures and additional
dimensional assessments, including those for diagnostic severity, can be found online at
www.psychiatry.org/dsm5.
Cross-Cutting Symptom Measures
Level 1 Cross-Cuttin g Symptom Measure
The DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cuttin g Symptom Measure is a patien t- or informant-rated mea-
sure that assesses mental health domains th at are important across psychiatric diagnoses.
It is intended to help clinicians identify addi tional areas of inquiry that may have signifi-
cant impact on the individual’s treatment and prognosis. In addition, the measure may be
used to track changes in the individu al’s symptom presentation over time.
The adult version of the measure consists of  23 questions that assess 13 psychiatric do-
mains, including depression, an ger, mania, anxiety, somatic symptoms, suicidal ideation,
psychosis, sleep problems, memo ry, repetitive thoughts and behaviors, dissociation, per-
sonality functioning, and substance use (Table 1). Each domain consists of one to three
questions. Each item inquires about how mu ch (or how often) the individual has been
bothered by the specific symptom during the p ast 2 weeks. If the individual is of impaired
capacity and unable to complete the form (e .g., an individual with dementia), a knowl-
edgeable adult informant may complete this measure. The measure was found to be clin-
ically useful and to have good reliability in  the DSM-5 field trials that were conducted in
adult clinical samples across the United States and in Canada.
The parent/guardian-rated ver sion of the measure (for childr en ages 6–17) consists of
25 questions that assess 12 psychiatric domain s, including depression, anger, irritability,
mania, anxiety, somatic symptoms, inattent ion, suicidal ideation/attempt, psychosis,
sleep disturbance, repetitive thoughts and behaviors, an d substance use (Table 2). Each
item asks the parent or guardian to rate ho w much (or how often) his or her child has been
bothered by the specific psychiatric symptom during the past 2 weeks. The measure was
also found to be clinically useful and to ha ve good reliability in the DSM-5 field trials that
were conducted in pediatric clinical samples across the United States. For children ages
11–17, along with the parent/guardian rating of the child’s sympto ms, the clinician may
consider having the child complete the child -rated version of the measure. The child-rated
version of the measure can be found online at www.psychiatry.org/dsm5.
Scoring and interpretation. On the adult self-rated version of the measure, each item is
rated on a 5-point scale (0=none or not at all; 1=slight or rare, less than a day or two; 2=mild
or several days; 3=moderate or more than half  the days; and 4=severe or nearly every day).
The score on each item within a domain should be reviewed. However, a rating of mild (i.e.,
2) or greater on any item within a domain, ex cept for substance use, suicidal ideation, and
psychosis, may serve as a guide for additional inquiry and follow-up to determine if a more
detailed assessment is necessary, which may include the Level 2 cross-cutting symptom as-
sessment for the domain (see Table 1). For substa nce use, suicidal idea tion, and psychosis, a
Assessment Measures 735
rating of slight (i.e., 1) or greater on any item  within the domain may serve as a guide for ad-
ditional inquiry and follow-up to determine if a more detailed a ssessment is needed. As
such, indicate the highest score within a domain in the “Highest domain score” column.
Table 1 outlines threshold scores that may guide further inquiry for the remaining domains.
On the parent/guardian-rated version of the measure (for children ages 6–17), 19 of the 25
items are each rated on a 5-point scale (0=none or not at all; 1=slight or rare, less than a day or
two; 2=mild or several days; 3=moderate or mo re than half the days; and 4=severe or nearly
every day). The suicidal ideation, suicide atte mpt, and substance abuse items are each rated
on a “Yes, No, or Don’t Know” scale. The score on each item within a domain should be re-
viewed. However, with the exception of inattentio n and psychosis, a rating of mild (i.e., 2) or
greater on any item within a domain that is scored on the 5-point scale may serve as a guide
for additional inquiry and follow-up to determin e if a more detailed assessment is necessary,
which may include the Level 2 cross-cutting symptom assessment for the domain (see
Table 2). For inattention or psychosis, a rating of slight or greater (i.e., 1 or greater) may beTABLE 1 Adult DSM-5 Self-Rated Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure: 
13 domains, thresholds for further inquiry, and associated DSM-5 
Level 2 measures
Domain Domain nameThreshold to guide 
further inquiryDSM-5 Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom 
Measurea
I. Depression Mild or greater Lev el 2—Depression—Adult (PROMIS 
Emotional Distress—Short Form)
II. Anger Mild or greater Level  2—Anger—Adult (PROMIS Emo-
tional Distress—Anger—Short Form)
III. Mania Mild or greater Level 2— Mania—Adult (Altman Self-Rating 
Mania Scale [ASRM])
IV. Anxiety Mild or greater Level 2—Anxiety—Adult (PROMIS 
Emotional Distress—Anxiety—Short 
Form)
V. Somatic symptoms Mild or greater Le vel 2—Somatic Symptom—Adult (Patient 
Health Questionnaire–15 
[PHQ-15] Somatic Symptom Severity 
Scale)
VI. Suicidal ideation Slight or greater None
VII. Psychosis Slight or greater None
VIII. Sleep problems Mild or greater Level 2—Sleep Disturbance—Adult 
(PROMIS Sleep Disturbance—Short Form)
IX. Memory Mild or greater None
X. Repetitive thoughts 
and behaviorsMild or greater Level 2—Repetitive Thoughts and 
Behaviors—Adult (Florida Obsessive-
Compulsive Inventory [FOCI] Severity 
Scale)
XI. Dissociation Mild or greater None
XII. Personality 
functioningMild or greater None
XIII. Substance use Slight or greater L evel 2—Substance Us e—Adult (adapted 
from the NIDA-Modified ASSIST)
Note. NIDA=National Institute on Drug Abuse.
aAvailable at www.ps ychiatry.org/dsm5.
736 Assessment Measures
used as an indicator for additional inquiry. A parent or guardian’s ra ting of “Don’t Know” on
the suicidal ideation, suicide a ttempt, and any of the substance use items, especially for chil-
dren ages 11–17 years, may result in additional probing of the issues with the child, including
using the child-rated Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure for the relevant domain. Be-
cause additional inquiry is made on the basis of the highest score on any item within a do-
main, clinicians should indicate that score in the “Highest Domain Score” column. Table 2
outlines threshold scores that may guide further inquiry for the remaining domains.TABLE 2 Parent/guardian-rated DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure 
for child age 6–17: 12 domains, thresholds for further inquiry, and 
associated Level 2 measures
Domain Domain nameThreshold to guide 
further inquiryDSM-5 Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom 
Measurea
I. Somatic symptoms Mild or greater Le vel 2—Somatic Symptoms—Parent/Guard-
ian of Child Age 6–17 (Patient Health 
Questionnaire–15 Somatic Symptom Sever-
ity Scale [PHQ-15])
II. Sleep problems Mild or greater Lev el 2—Sleep Disturbance—Parent/Guard-
ian of Child Age 6–17 (PROMIS Sleep 
Disturbance—Short Form)
III. Inattention Slight or greater Level 2—Inattention—Parent/Guardian of 
Child Age 6–17 (Swanson , Nolan, and Pel-
ham, Version IV [SNAP-IV])
IV. Depression Mild or greater Level 2—Depression—Parent/Guardian of 
Child Age 6–17 (PROMIS Emotional Dis-
tress—Depression—Parent Item Bank)
V. Anger Mild or greater Level 2—Anger—Parent/Guardian of Child 
(PROMIS Calibrated Anger Measure—Parent)
VI. Irritability Mild or greater Level 2—Irritability—Parent/Guardian of 
Child (Affective Reactivity Index [ARI])
VII. Mania Mild or greater Level 2— Mania—Parent/Guardian of Child 
Age 6–17 (Altman Self-Rating Mania Scale 
[ASRM])
VIII. Anxiety Mild or greater Level 2—Anxiety—Parent/Guardian of Child 
Age 6–17 (PROMIS Emotional Distress—
Anxiety—Parent Item Bank)
IX. Psychosis Slight or greater None
X. Repetitive thoughts 
and behaviorsMild or greater None
XI. Substance use Yes Level 2—Substance Use—Parent/Guardian of 
Child Age 6–17 (adapted from the NIDA-
modified ASSIST)
Don’t Know NIDA-modified ASSIST (adapted)—
Child-Rated (age 11–17 years)
XII. Suicidal ideation/ 
suicide attemptsYes None
Don’t Know None
Note. NIDA=National Institute on Drug Abuse.
aAvailable at www.ps ychiatry.org/dsm5.
Assessment Measures 737
Level 2 Cross-Cuttin g Symptom Measures
Any threshold scores on the Level 1 Cross- Cutting Symptom Measure (as noted in Tables
1 and 2 and described in “Scoring and Interpretation” indicate a possible need for detailed
clinical inquiry. Level 2 Cr oss-Cutting Symptom Measures provide one method of obtain-
ing more in-depth information on potentially significant symptoms to inform diagnosis,
treatment planning, and follow-up. They ar e available online at www.psychiatry.org/
dsm5. Tables 1 and 2 outline each Level 1 domain and identify the domains for which
DSM-5 Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measures  are available for more detailed assess-
ments. Adult and pediatric (parent and child) versions are available online for most Level
1 symptom domains at www.psychiatry.org/dsm5.
Frequency of Use of the Cross-Cutting 
Symptom Measures
To track change in the individual’s sympto m presentation over time , the Level 1 and rel-
evant Level 2 cross-cutting symptom measures  may be completed at regular intervals as
clinically indicated, depending on the stab ility of the individual’s symptoms and treat-
ment status. For individuals with impaired capacity and for children ages 6–17 years, it is
preferable for the measures to be comple ted at follow-up appointments by the same
knowledgeable informant and by  the same parent or guardian. Consistently high scores
on a particular domain may indicate signif icant and problematic sy mptoms for the indi-
vidual that might warrant further assessment, treatment, and follow-up. Clinical judg-
ment should guide decision making.
738 Assessment MeasuresDSM-5 Self-Rated Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure—Adult
Name:__________________________________________ ______________ Age: __________ Sex: [ ] Male [ ] Female Date:_____________
If the measure is being completed by an informant , what is your relationship with the individual?: __________________________ ____
In a typical week, approximately how much time do you spend with th e individual? _________________________ hours/week
Instructions:  The questions below ask about things that might have bothered you. For each question, circle the nu mber that best describes ho w much (or how 
often) you have been bothered  by each problem during the past TWO (2) WEEKS.
During the past TWO (2) WEEKS,  how much (or how often) 
have you been bothered by the following problems?None
Not at 
allSlight
Rare, less than 
a day or twoMild
Several 
daysModerate
More than
half the daysSevere
Nearly 
every dayHighest 
Domain Score
(clinician)
I. 1.Little interest or pleasure in doing things? 0 1 2 3 4
2.Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless? 0 1 2 3 4
II. 3. Feeling more irritated, gr ouchy, angry than usual? 0 1 2 3 4
III. 4.Sleeping less than usual, but still have a lot of energy? 0 1 2 3 4
5.Starting lots more projects than usual or doing more risky things 
than usual?0 1 2 3 4
IV. 6.Feeling nervous, anxious, frig htened, worried, or on edge? 0 1 2 3 4
7.Feeling panic or being frightened? 0 1 2 3 4
8.Avoiding situations that make you anxious? 0 1 2 3 4
V. 9.Unexplained aches and pains (e.g., head, back, joints, abdomen, 
legs)?0 1 2 3 4
10. Feeling that your illnesses are not being taken seriously enough? 0 1 2 3 4
VI. 11. Thoughts of actually hurting yourself? 0 1 2 3 4
Assessment Measures 739VII. 12. Hearing things other people couldn’t hear, such as voices even 
when no one was around?0 1 2 3 4
13. Feeling that someone could hear your thoughts, or that you 
could hear what another person was thinking?0 1 2 3 4
VIII. 14. Problems with sleep that affect ed your sleep quality over all? 0 1 2 3 4
IX. 15. Problems with memory (e.g., lear ning new information) or with 
location (e.g., finding your way home)?0 1 2 3 4
X. 16. Unpleasant thoughts, urges, or  images that repeatedly enter 
your mind?0 1 2 3 4
17. Feeling driven to perform certai n behaviors or mental acts over 
and over again?0 1 2 3 4
XI. 18. Feeling detached or distant from yourself, your body, your phys-
ical surroundings, or your memories?0 1 2 3 4
XII. 19. Not knowing who you really are or what you want out of life? 0 1 2 3 4
20. Not feeling close to other people or enjoying your relationships 
with them?01 23 4
XIII. 21. Drink at least 4 drinks of any kind of alcohol in a single day? 0 1 2 3 4
22. Smoke any cigarettes, a cigar, or pipe, or use snuff or chewing 
tobacco?0 1 2 3 4
23. Use any of the following medicines ON YOUR OWN, that is, 
without a doctor’s prescription, in greater amounts or longer 
than prescribed [e.g., painkillers  (like Vicodin), stimulants (like 
Ritalin or Adderall), sedatives or tranquilizers (like sleeping 
pills or Valium), or drugs like marijuana, cocaine or crack, club 
drugs (like ecstasy), hallucinogen s (like LSD), heroin, inhalants 
or solvents (like glue), or  methamphetamine (like speed)]?0 1 2 3 4
740 Assessment MeasuresParent/Guardian-Rated DSM-5 Level 1 Cros s-Cutting Symptom Measure—Child Age 6–17
Child’s Name:__________________________________________ ___ Age: __________ Sex: [ ] Male [ ] Female Date:_____________
Relationship to the child:  ___________________________________
Instructions  (to parent or guardian of child): The questions below ask about things that might have bothered your child. For each question, circle the number that 
best describes how much (or how often) your child has been bothered by each problem during t he past TWO (2) WEEKS.
During the past TWO (2) WEEKS,  how much (or how often) has your 
child…None
Not at 
allSlight
Rare, less than 
a day or twoMild
Several 
daysModerate
More than 
half the daysSevere
Nearly 
every dayHighest 
Domain Score  
(clinician)
I. 1.Complained of stomachaches, headaches, or other aches and 
pains?0 1 2 3 4
2.Said he/she was worried about hi s/her health or about getting 
sick?0 1 2 3 4
II. 3. Had problems sleeping—that is, trouble falling asleep, staying 
asleep, or waking up too early?01 23 4
III. 4.Had problems paying attention when he/she was in class or 
doing his/her homework or read ing a book or playing a game?0 1 2 3 4
IV. 5. Had less fun doing things than he/she used to? 0 1 2 3 4
6. Seemed sad or depressed for several hours? 0 1 2 3 4
V.
 and
VI.7.Seemed more irritated or easily annoyed than usual? 0 1 2 3 4
8.Seemed angry or lost his/her temper? 0 1 2 3 4
VII. 9. Starting lots more projects than usual or doing more risky things 
than usual?01 23 4
10. Sleeping less than usual for him/her but still has lots of energy? 0 1 2 3 4
VIII. 11. Said he/she felt nervous, anxious, or scared? 0 1 2 3 4
12. Not been able to stop worrying? 0 1 2 3 4
13. Said he/she couldn’t do things he/she wanted to or should have 
done because they made him/her feel nervous? 0 1 2 3 4
Assessment Measures 741IX. 14. Said that he/she heard voices—when there was no one there—
speaking about him/her or tellin g him/her what to do or say-
ing bad things to him/her?01 23 4
15. Said that he/she had a vision when he/she was completely awake—
that is, saw something or someone that no one else could see?01 23 4
X.16. Said that he/she had thoughts that kept coming into his/her 
mind that he/she would do so mething bad or that something 
bad would happen to him/her or to someone else?0 1 2 3 4
17. Said he/she felt the need to chec k on certain things over and over 
again, like whether a door was locked or whether the stove was 
turned off?0 1 2 3 4
18. Seemed to worry a lot about things he/she touched being dirty or 
having germs or being poisoned?0 1 2 3 4
19. Said that he/she had to do things  in a certain way, like counting 
or saying special things out lo ud, in order to keep something 
bad from happening?0 1 2 3 4
In the past TWO (2) WEEKS,  has your child…
XI. 20. Had an alcoholic beverage  (beer, wine, liquor, etc.)? ❑ Yes ❑ No ❑ Don’t Know
21. Smoked a cigarette, a cigar, or pipe, or used snuff or chewing 
tobacco?❑ Yes ❑ No ❑ Don’t Know
22. Used drugs like marijuana, cocaine or crack, club drugs (like 
ecstasy), hallucinogens (like LSD), heroin, inhalants or solvents 
(like glue), or methamphetamine (like speed)?❑ Yes ❑ No ❑ Don’t Know
23. Used any medicine without a doctor ’s prescription (e.g., painkillers 
[like Vicodin], stimulants [like Ritalin or Adderall], sedatives or 
tranquilizers [like sleeping pills or Valium], or steroids)?❑ Yes ❑ No ❑ Don’t Know
XII. 24. In the past TWO (2) WEEKS,  has he/she talked about wanting to 
kill himself/herself or about wanting to commit suicide?❑ Yes ❑ No ❑ Don’t Know
25. Has he/she EVER tried to kill himself/herself? ❑ Yes ❑ No ❑ Don’t Know
742 Assessment Measures
Clinician-Rated Dimensions of
Psychosis Symptom Severity
As described in the chapter “Schizophrenia  Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders,”
psychotic disorders are hetero geneous, and symptom severity  can predict important as-
pects of the illness, such as the degree of cogn itive and/or neurobiological deficits. Dimen-
sional assessments capture meaningful variation in the severity of symptoms, which may
help with treatment planning, prognostic decision-making, and research on pathophysi-
ological mechanisms. The Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity
provides scales for the dimensional assessment  of the primary symptoms of psychosis, in-
cluding hallucinations, delusions, disorganiz ed speech, abnormal psychomotor behavior,
and negative symptoms. A scale for the dimensional assessment of cognitive impairment
is also included. Many individuals with psyc hotic disorders have im pairments in a range
of cognitive domains, which predict functional abilities. In addition, scales for dimensional
assessment of depression and mania are provided , which may alert clinicians to mood pa-
thology. The severity of mood symptoms in psychosis has prognostic value and guides
treatment. 
The Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity is an 8-item measure
that may be completed by the clinician at the time of the clinical assessment. Each item asks
the clinician to rate the severity of each sy mptom as experienced by the individual during
the past 7 days.
Scoring and Interpretation
Each item on the measure is rated on a 5-poin t scale (0=none; 1=equivocal; 2=present, but
mild; 3=present and moderate; and 4=present and severe) with a sy mptom-specific defi-
nition of each rating level. The clinician may review all of the individual’s available infor-
mation and, based on clinical judgment, select (with checkmark) the level that most
accurately describes the severity of the indivi dual’s condition. The clinician then indicates
the score for each item in the “Score” column provided.
Frequency of Use
To track changes in the indi vidual’s symptom severity over time, the measure may be
completed at regular intervals as clinically in dicated, depending on the stability of the in-
dividual’s symptoms an d treatment status. Consistently high scores on a particular do-
main may indicate significant and problematic areas for the individual that might warrant
further assessment, treatment, and follow-up.  Clinical judgment should guide decision
making.
Assessment Measures 743Clinician-Rated Dimensions of  Psychosis Symptom Severity 
Name:______________________________________ ______ Age: __________ Sex: [ ] Male [ ] Female  Date:________________
Instructions:  Based on all the information you have on the individual and usin g your clinical judgment, please rate (with checkmark) the pre sence and severity 
of the following symptoms as experienced by the in dividual in the past seven (7) days.
 Domain 0 1 2 3 4 Score
I. Hallucinations ❑ Not present ❑ Equivocal (severity or 
duration not sufficient 
to be considered psy-
chosis)❑ Present, but mild (lit-
tle pressure to act 
upon voices, not very 
bothered by voices)❑ Present and moderate 
(some pressure to 
respond to voices, or 
is somewhat bothered 
by voices)❑ Present and severe 
(severe pressure to 
respond to voices, or 
is very bothered by 
voices)
II.  Delusions ❑ Not present ❑ Equivocal (severity or 
duration not sufficient 
to be considered psy-
chosis)❑ Present, but mild (lit-
tle pressure to act 
upon delusional 
beliefs, not very both-
ered by beliefs)❑ Present and moderate 
(some pressure to act 
upon beliefs, or is 
somewhat bothered 
by beliefs)❑ Present and severe 
(severe pressure to act 
upon beliefs, or is very 
bothered by beliefs)
III. Disorganized speech ❑ Not present ❑ Equivocal (severity or 
duration not sufficient 
to be considered dis-
organization)❑ Present, but mild 
(some difficulty fol-
lowing speech)❑ Present and moderate 
(speech often difficult 
to follow)❑ Present and severe 
(speech almost impos-
sible to follow)
IV.  Abnormal psychomo-
tor behavior❑ Not present ❑ Equivocal (severity or 
duration not sufficient 
to be considered 
abnormal psychomo-
tor behavior)❑ Present, but mild 
(occasional abnormal 
or bizarre motor 
behavior or catatonia)❑ Present and moderate 
(frequent abnormal or 
bizarre motor behav-
ior or catatonia)❑ Present and severe 
(abnormal or bizarre 
motor behavior or 
catatonia almost con-
stant)
V.  Negative symptoms 
(restricted emotional 
expression or avolition)❑ Not present ❑ Equivocal decrease in 
facial expressivity, 
prosody, gestures, or 
self-initiated behavior❑ Present, but mild 
decrease in facial 
expressivity, pros-
ody, gestures, or self-
initiated behavior❑ Present and moderate 
decrease in facial 
expressivity, pros-
ody, gestures, or self-
initiated behavior❑ Present and severe 
decrease in facial 
expressivity, pros-
ody, gestures, or self-
initiated behavior
744 Assessment Measures Domain 0 1 2 3 4 Score
VI. Impaired cognition ❑ Not present ❑ Equivocal (cognitive 
function not clearly 
outside the range 
expected for age or 
SES; i.e., within 0.5 SD 
of mean)❑ Present, but mild 
(some reduction in 
cognitive function; 
below expected for 
age and SES, 0.5–1 SD 
from mean)❑ Present and moderate 
(clear reduction in 
cognitive function; 
below expected for 
age and SES, 1–2 SD 
from mean)❑ Present and severe 
(severe reduction in 
cognitive function; 
below expected for 
age and SES, >2 SD 
from mean)
VII. Depression ❑ Not present ❑ Equivocal (occasion-
ally feels sad, down, 
depressed, or hope-
less; concerned about 
having failed some-
one or at something 
but not preoccupied)❑ Present, but mild (fre-
quent periods of feel-
ing very sad, down, 
moderately 
depressed, or hope-
less; concerned about 
having failed some-
one or at something, 
with some preoccupa-
tion)❑ Present and moderate 
(frequent periods of 
deep depression or 
hopelessness; preoc-
cupation with guilt, 
having done wrong)❑ Present and severe 
(deeply depressed or 
hopeless daily; delu-
sional guilt or unrea-
sonable self-reproach 
grossly out of propor-
tion to circumstances)
VIII. Mania ❑ Not present ❑ Equivocal (occasional 
elevated, expansive, 
or irritable mood or 
some restlessness)❑ Present, but mild (fre-
quent periods of 
somewhat elevated, 
expansive, or irritable 
mood or restlessness)❑ Present and moderate 
(frequent periods of 
extensively elevated, 
expansive, or irritable 
mood or restlessness)❑ Present and severe 
(daily and extensively 
elevated, expansive, 
or irritable mood or 
restlessness)
Note.  SD=standard deviation; SES=socioeconomic status.
Assessment Measures 745
World Health Organization
 Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0
The adult self-administered vers ion of the World Health Organization Disability Assessment
Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS 2.0) is a 36-item measur e that assesses disability in adults age 18
years and older. It assesses disability across six domains, including understanding and
communicating, getting around, self-care, gett ing along with people, life activities (i.e.,
household, work, and/or school activities), an d participation in society. If the adult indi-
vidual is of impaired capacity and unable to complete the form (e.g., a patient with demen-
tia), a knowledgeable informant may complete  the proxy-administered version of the
measure, which is available at www.psychiatry. org/dsm5. Each item on  the self-administered
version of the WHODAS 2.0 asks the individual to rate how much difficulty he or she has
had in specific areas of functioning during the past 30 days.
WHODAS 2.0 Scoring Instructions Provided by WHO
WHODAS 2.0 summary scores. There are two basic options for computing the summary
scores for the WHODAS 2.0 36-item full version.
Simple:  The scores assigned to each of the items—“none” (1), “mild” (2), “moderate” (3),
“severe” (4), and “extreme” (5 )—are summed. This method is referred to as simple scoring
because the scores from each of the items are simply added up withou t recoding or collaps-
ing of response categories; thus, there is no we ighting of individual items. This approach is
practical to use as a hand-scoring approach, and may be the method of choice in busy clin-
ical settings or in paper-and-pencil interview situations. As a result, the simple sum of the
scores of the items across all domains constitutes a statistic that is suff icient to describe the
degree of functional limitations.
Complex:  The more complex method of scoring is called “item-response-theory”
(IRT)–based scoring. It takes into account mu ltiple levels of diffic ulty for each WHODAS
2.0 item. It takes the coding for each item response as “none,” “mild,” “moderate,” “se-
vere,” and “extreme” separately, and then uses a computer to determine the summary
score by differentially weighting the items and the levels of severity. The computer pro-
gram is available from the WHO Web site. The scoring has three steps:
• Step 1—Summing of recoded item scores within each domain.
• Step 2—Summing of all six domain scores.
• Step 3—Converting the summary score in to a metric ranging from 0 to 100 
(where 0=no disability; 100=full disability).
WHODAS 2.0 domain scores. WHODAS 2.0 produces domain-specific scores for six
different functioning domains: cognition, mobilit y, self-care, getting along, life activities
(household and work/school), and participation.
WHODAS 2.0 population norms. For the population norms fo r IRT-based scoring of the
WHODAS 2.0 and for the population distribution of IRT-based scores for WHODAS 2.0,
please see www.who.int/clas sifications/icf/Pop_norms_distrib_IRT_scores.pdf.
Additional Scoring and Inte rpretation Guidance for 
DSM-5 Users
The clinician is asked to review the individu al’s response on each item on the measure
during the clinical interview and to indicate th e self-reported score for each item in the sec-
tion provided for “Clinician Use Only.” However,  if the clinician determines that the score
on an item should be different based on the clinical interview and other information avail-
746 Assessment Measures
able, he or she may indicate a corrected score in the raw item score box. Based on findings
from the DSM-5 Field Trials in adult patient samples across si x sites in the United States
and one in Canada, DSM-5 recommends calculation and use of average scores for each domain
and for general disability. The average scores are comparab le to the WHODAS 5-point scale,
which allows the clinician to think of the individual’s disability in terms of none (1), mild
(2), moderate (3), severe (4 ), or extreme (5). The averag e domain and general disability
scores were found to be reliable, easy to use, and clinically useful to the clinicians in the
DSM-5 Field Trials. The average domain score  is calculated by dividing the raw domain score
by the number of items in the domain (e.g., if all the items within the “understanding and
communicating” domain are rated as being moderate then the average domain score
would be 18/6=3, indicating moderate disability). The average general disability score  is cal-
culated by dividing the raw overall score by nu mber of items in the measure (i.e., 36). The
individual should be encouraged to complete a ll of the items on the WHODAS 2.0. If no re-
sponse is given on 10 or  more items of the measure (i.e.,  more than 25% of the 36 total
items), calculation of the simple and average general disability scores may not be helpful.
If 10 or more of the total items on the measur e are missing but the items for some of the do-
mains are 75%–100% complete, the simple or aver age domain scores may be used for those
domains.
Frequency of use. To track change in the individual’s level of disability over time, the
measure may be completed at regular intervals as clinically indicated, depending on the
stability of the individual’s symptoms and trea tment status. Consistently high scores on a
particular domain may indicate significant and problematic areas for the individual that
might warrant further assessment and intervention.
Assessment Measures 747
WHODAS 2.0 
World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0 
36-item version, self-administered 
3DWLHQW1DPH BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB$JH BBBBBB  6H[0DOH)HPDOH ' D W H BBBBBBBBBBBBB 
This questionnaire asks about difficulties due to health /mental health conditions. Health conditions include diseases or 
illnesses, other health problems that may be short or long lasting, injuries, mental or emotional problems, and problems 
with alcohol or drugs. Think back over the past 30 days  and answer these questions thinking about how much difficulty you 
had doing the following activities. For each question, please circle only one response.  
 ClinicianUse
Only
Numeric scores assigned to each of the items: 1 2 3 4 5 
Raw Item 
Score 
Raw 
Domain 
Score 
Average 
Domain 
Score In the last 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in: 
Understanding and communicating  
D1.1 Concentrating on doing so mething for ten minutes?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
 
____ 
30 
  
____ 
5 
 D1.2 Remembering to do important things?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D1.3 Analyzing and finding solutions to problems in day-
to-day life?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D1.4 Learning a new task, for example, learning how to 
get to a new place?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D1.5 Generally understanding what people say?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D1.6 Starting and maintaining a conversation?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
Getting around   
D2.1 Standing for long periods, such as 30 minutes?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
 
____ 
25 
  
____ 
5 
 D2.2 Standing up from sitting down?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D2.3 Moving around inside your home?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D2.4 Getting out of your home?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D2.5 Walking a long distance, such as a kilometer (or 
equivalent)?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
Self-care   
D3.1 Washing your whole body?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
 
____ 
20 
  
____ 
5 
 D3.2 Getting dressed?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D3.3 Eating?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D3.4 Staying by yourself for a few days?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
Getting along with people   
D4.1 Dealing with people you do not know?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
 
____ 
25 
  
____ 
5 
 D4.2 Maintaining a friendship?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D4.3 Getting along with people who are close to you?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D4.4 Making new friends?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D4.5 Sexual activities?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
748 Assessment Measures
 ClinicianUse
Only
Numeric scores assigned to each of the items: 1 2 3 4 5 
Raw Item 
Score 
Raw 
Domain 
Score 
Average 
Domain 
Score In the last 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in: 
Life activities ͶHousehold  
D5.1 Taking care of your household responsibilities?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
 
____ 
20 
  
____ 
5 
 D5.2 Doing most important household tasks well?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D5.3 Getting all of the household work done that you 
needed to do?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D5.4 Getting your household work done as quickly as 
needed?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
Life activities ͶSchool/Work   
If you work (paid, non-paid, self-employed) or go to school, complete questions D5.5 ʹD5.8, below. 
Otherwise, skip to D6.1.  
Because of your health condition, in the past 30 days, how much difficulty did you have in:  
D5.5 Your day-to-day work/school?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
 
____ 
20 
  
____ 
5 
 D5.6 Doing your most important work/school tasks well?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D5.7 Getting all of the work done that you need to do?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D5.8 Getting your work done as quickly as needed?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
Participation in society   
In the past 30 days:  
D6.1 How much of a problem did you have in joining in 
community activities (for example, festivities, 
religious, or other activities) in the same way as 
anyone else can?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
 
____ 
40 
  
____ 
5 
 D6.2 How much of a problem did you have because of 
barriers or hindrances around you?   
None  
Mild  
Moderate  
Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D6.3 How much of a problem did you have living with 
dignity because of the attitudes and actions of 
others?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D6.4 How much time did you spend on your health 
condition or its consequences?  None Some Moderate A Lot Extreme or 
cannot do  
D6.5 How much have you been emotionally affected by 
your health condition?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D6.6 How much has your health been a drain on the 
financial resources of you or your family?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D6.7 How much of a problem did your family have 
because of your health problems?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
D6.8 How much of a problem did you have in doing 
things by yourself for relaxation or pleasure?  None Mild Moderate Severe Extreme or 
cannot do  
General Disability Score (Total): ____ 
180 ____ 
5 
:RUOG+HDOWK2UJDQL]DWLRQ$OOULJKWVUHVHUYHG0HDVXUL QJKHDOWKDQGGLVDELOLW\PDQXDOIRU:+2'LVDELOLW\
$VVHVVPHQW6FKHGXOH:+2'$6 :RUOG+HDOWK2UJDQL]DWLRQ *HQHYD

7KH:RUOG+HDOWK2UJDQL]DWLRQKD VJUDQWHGWKH3XEOLVKHUSHUPLVV LRQIRUWKHUHSURGXFWLRQRIWKLV LQVWUXPHQW7KLVPDWHULDOFDQ
EHUHSURGXFHGZLWKRXWSHUPLVVLRQE\FOLQLFLDQVIRUXVHZLWKWKH LURZQSDWLHQWV$Q\RWKHUXVHLQFOXGLQJHOHFWURQLFXVH
UHTXLUHVZULWWHQSHUPLVVLRQIURP:+2 © World Health Organization, 2012. All rights reserved. Measuring health and disability: manual for WHO Disability
Assessment Schedule (WHODAS 2.0), World Health Organization, 2010, Geneva.
The World Health Organization has granted the Publisher permission for the reproduction of this instrument. This material can
be reproduced without permission by clinicians for use with their own patients. Any other use, including electronic use,
requires written permission from WHO.
749Cultural
 Formulation
Understanding the cultural  context of illness experience is essential for effec-
tive diagnostic assessment and clinical management. Culture  refers to systems of knowl-
edge, concepts, rules, and practices that ar e learned and transmitted across generations.
Culture includes language, religion and spirit uality, family structur es, life-cycle stages,
ceremonial rituals, and customs, as well as moral and legal systems. Cultures are open,
dynamic systems that undergo continuous ch ange over time; in the contemporary world,
most individuals and groups are exposed to mu ltiple cultures, which they use to fashion
their own identities and make sense of experi ence. These features of culture make it cru-
cial not to overgeneralize cultur al information or stereotype groups in terms of fixed cul-
tural traits.
Race  is a culturally constructed category of identity that divides humanity into groups
based on a variety of superficia l physical traits attributed to  some hypothetical intrinsic,
biological characteristics. Racial categories an d constructs have varied widely over history
and across societies. The construct of race has no consistent biological definition, but it is
socially important because it supports racial ideologies, racism, discrimination, and social
exclusion, which can have strong negative effe cts on mental health. There is evidence that
racism can exacerbate many psychiatric disord ers, contributing to poor outcome, and that
racial biases can affect diagnostic assessment.
Ethnicity is a culturally constructed group identity used to define peoples and communi-
ties. It may be rooted in a common history, geography, language, religion, or other shared
characteristics of a group, which distinguish th at group from others. Ethnicity may be self-
assigned or attributed by out siders. Increasing mobility, inte rmarriage, and intermixing of
cultures has defined new mixed, multiple, or hybrid ethnic identities.
Culture, race, and ethnicity are related to economic inequities, racism, and discrimina-
tion that result in health disparities. Cultural , ethnic, and racial identities can be sources of
strength and group support that enhance resilie nce, but they may also lead to psycholog-
ical, interpersonal, and intergen erational conflict or difficultie s in adaptation that require
diagnostic assessment.
Outline for Cultural Formulation
The Outline for Cultural Formulation introduc ed in DSM-IV provided  a framework for as-
sessing information about cultural features of an individu al’s mental health problem and
how it relates to a social and cultural context and history. DS M-5 not only includes an up-
dated version of the Outline but also presents  an approach to assessment, using the Cul-
tural Formulation Interview (CFI), which has been field-tested for diagnostic usefulness
among clinicians and for acceptability among patients.
The revised Outline for Cultur al Formulation calls for syst ematic assessment of the fol-
lowing categories:
•Cultural identity of the individual:  Describe the individual’s racial, ethnic, or cultural
reference groups that may influence his or he r relationships with others, access to re-
750 Cultural Formulation
sources, and developmental and current chal lenges, conflicts, or predicaments. For im-
migrants and racial or ethnic minorities, th e degree and kinds of involvement with both
the culture of origin and the ho st culture or majority cultur e should be noted separately.
Language abilities, preferences,  and patterns of use are relevant for identifying difficul-
ties with access to care, social integration, and the need fo r an interprete r. Other clini-
cally relevant aspects of identity may in clude religious affiliation, socioeconomic
background, personal and family places of  birth and growing up, migrant status, and
sexual orientation.
•Cultural conceptualizations of distress:  Describe the cultural constructs that influence
how the individual experiences, understands, and communicates his or her symptoms
or problems to others. These constructs may include cultural syndromes, idioms of dis-
tress, and explanatory models or perceived causes. The level of severity and meaning of
the distressing experiences shou ld be assessed in relation to the norms of the individ-
ual’s cultural reference groups. Assessment of coping and help-seeking patterns should
consider the use of profession al as well as traditional, alternative, or complementary
sources of care.
•Psychosocial stressors and cultural feat ures of vulnerability and resilience:  Identify
key stressors and supports in the individual ’s social environment (which may include
both local and distant events) and the role of religion, family, and other social networks
(e.g., friends, neighb ors, coworkers) in providing emotional, instrumental, and infor-
mational support. Social stressors and social  supports vary with cultural interpreta-
tions of events, family structure, developm ental tasks, and social context. Levels of
functioning, disability, and resilience should be  assessed in light of the individual’s cul-
tural reference groups.
•Cultural features of the relationship between the individual and the clinician:  Iden-
tify differences in culture, language, and social status between an individual and clini-
cian that may cause difficulties in communication and may influence diagnosis and
treatment. Experiences of racism and discri mination in the larger society may impede
establishing trust and safety in the clinical  diagnostic encounter. Effects may include
problems eliciting symptoms, misunderstanding of the cultural and clinical signifi-
cance of symptoms and behaviors, and diffi culty establishing or maintaining the rap-
port needed for an effe ctive clinical alliance.
•Overall cultural assessment:  Summarize the implications of the components of the cul-
tural formulation identified in  earlier sections of the Ou tline for diagnosis and other
clinically relevant issues or problems as well as appropriate management and treat-
ment intervention.
Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI)
The Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI) is a set of 16 questions that clinicians may use to
obtain information during a me ntal health assessment about the impact of culture on key
aspects of an individual’s clinical presentation and care. In the CFI, culture  refers to
• The values, orientations, kn owledge, and practices that individuals derive from mem-
bership in diverse social groups (e.g., et hnic groups, faith communities, occupational
groups, veterans groups).
• Aspects of an individual’s background, de velopmental experiences, and current social
contexts that may affect his or her perspe ctive, such as geographical origin, migration,
language, religion, sexual orie ntation, or race/ethnicity.
• The influence of family, friends, and ot her community members (the individual’s social
network ) on the individual’s illness experience.
Cultural Formulation 751
The CFI is a brief semistructured  interview for systematically assessing cultural factors
in the clinical encounter that may be used with any individual. The CFI focuses on the in-
dividual’s experience and the so cial contexts of the clinical problem. The CFI follows a per-
son-centered approach to cult ural assessment by eliciting information from the individual
about his or her own views and those of others in his or her social network. This approach
is designed to avoid stereotyping, in that each  individual’s cultural knowledge affects how
he or she interprets illness experience and gu ides how he or she seeks help. Because the
CFI concerns the individual’s personal views, there are no right or wrong answers to these
questions. The interview follows and is available online at www.psychiatry.org/dsm5.
The CFI is formatted as two text columns. The left-hand column contains the instruc-
tions for administering the CFI and describes the goals for each interview domain. The
questions in the right-hand column illustrate how to explore these domains, but they are
not meant to be exhaustive. Follow-up question s may be needed to clarify individuals’ an-
swers. Questions may be rephrased as needed. Th e CFI is intended as a guide to cultural as-
sessment and should be used flexibly to maintain a natural flow of the interview and rapport
with the individual.
The CFI is best used in conjunction with  demographic information obtained prior to
the interview in order to tailor the CFI ques tions to address the in dividual’s background
and current situation. Specific demographic do mains to be explored with the CFI will vary
across individuals and settings. A comprehens ive assessment may include place of birth,
age, gender, racial/ethnic origin, marital stat us, family composition,  education, language
fluencies, sexual orientation, religious or sp iritual affiliation, occupation, employment, in-
come, and migration history.
The CFI can be used in the initial assessment of individuals in all clinical settings, regard-
less of the cultural background of the individual or of the clinician. Individuals and clini-
cians who appear to share the same cultural background may nevertheless differ in ways
that are relevant to care. The CFI may be used in its entirety, or components may be incor-
porated into a clinical evaluation as needed. The CFI may be es pecially helpful when there is
• Difficulty in diagnostic assessment owing to  significant differences in the cultural, re-
ligious, or socioeconomi c backgrounds of clinician and the individual.
• Uncertainty about the fit between culturally distinctive symptoms and diagnostic criteria.
• Difficulty in judging illness severity or impairment.
• Disagreement between the individual an d clinician on the course of care.
• Limited engagement in and adherenc e to treatment by the individual.
The CFI emphasizes four domains of assessmen t: Cultural Definition of the Problem
(questions 1–3); Cultural Perceptions of Caus e, Context, and Support (questions 4–10); Cul-
tural Factors Affecting Self-Coping and Past Help Seeking (questions 11–13); and Cultural
Factors Affecting Current Help Seeking (questions 14–16). Both the person-centered process
of conducting the CFI and the information it el icits are intended to enhance the cultural va-
lidity of diagnostic assessmen t, facilitate treatment planning , and promote the individual’s
engagement and satisfaction. To  achieve these goals, the info rmation obtained from the CFI
should be integrated with all other available clinical material into a comprehensive clinical
and contextual evaluation. An In formant version of the CFI can be used to collect collateral
information on the CFI domains from  family members or caregivers.
Supplementary modules have b een developed that expand on each domain of the CFI
and guide clinicians who wish to explore th ese domains in greater depth. Supplementary
modules have also been developed for specific populations, such as children and adoles-
cents, elderly individuals, and immigrants and refugees. These supplementary modules
are referenced in the CFI under the pertin ent subheadings and are available online at
www.psychiatry.org/dsm5.
752 Cultural Formulation
Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI)
Supplementary modules used to  expand each CFI subtopic are noted in parentheses.
GUIDE TO INTERVIEWERINSTRUCTIONS TO THE INTERVIEWER ARE 
ITALICIZED.
The following questions aim to clarify key aspects of 
the presenting clinical pr oblem from the point of 
view of the individual and other members of the 
individual’s social network (i.e., family, friends, or 
others involved in current problem). This includes 
the problem’s meaning, potential sources of help, 
and expectations for services.INTRODUCTION FOR THE INDIVIDUAL:
I would like to understand the problems that 
bring you here so that I can help you more 
effectively. I want to know about your  experi-
ence and ideas. I will ask some questions 
about what is going on  and how you are deal-
ing with it. Please remember there are no 
right or wrong answers.
CULTURAL DEFINITION OF THE PROBLEM
CULTURAL  DEFINITION  OF THE PROBLEM
(Explanatory Model, Level of Functioning)
Elicit the individual’s view  of core problems and key 
concerns.
Focus on the individual’s own way of understand-
ing the problem.
Use the term, expression, or brief description elicited 
in question 1 to identify the problem in subsequent 
questions (e.g., “your conflict with your son”).1. What brings you here today?
IF INDIVIDUAL GIVES FEW DETAILS OR 
ONLY MENTIONS SYMPTOMS OR A 
MEDICAL DIAGNOSIS, PROBE:
People often understand their problems in 
their own way, which may be similar to or 
different from how doctors describe the 
problem. How would you describe your 
problem?
Ask how individual frames the problem for members 
of the social network.2. Sometimes people have different ways of 
describing their problem to their family, 
friends, or others in their community. How 
would you describe your problem to them?
Focus on the aspects of the problem that matter most 
to the individual.3. What troubles you mo st about your prob-
lem?
CULTURAL PERCEPTIONS OF CA USE, CONTEXT, AND SUPPORT
CAUSES
(Explanatory Model, Social Network, Older Adults)
This question indicates the meaning of the condition 
for the individual, which may be relevant for clin-
ical care.4. Why do you think this is happening to 
you? What do you think are the causes of 
your [PROBLEM]?
Note that individuals may identify multiple causes, 
depending on the facet of the problem they are con-
sidering.PROMPT FURTHER IF REQUIRED:
Some people may explain their problem as 
the result of bad things that happen in their 
life, problems with others, a physical ill-
ness, a spiritual reason, or many other 
causes.
Focus on the views of memb ers of the in dividual’s 
social network. These may be diverse and vary from 
the individual’s.5. What do others in your family, your 
friends, or others in your community think 
is causing your [PROBLEM]?
Cultural Formulation 753
STRESSORS  AND  SUPPORTS
(Social Network, Caregivers, Psychosocial Stre ssors, Religion and Spirituality, Immigrants and 
Refugees, Cultural Identity, Older Adults, Coping and Help Seeking)
Elicit information on the individual’s life context, 
focusing on resources, social supports, and resil-
ience. May also probe other supports (e.g., from co-
workers, from participation in religion or spiritu-
ality).6. Are there any kinds of support that make 
your [PROBLEM] better, such as support 
from family, friends, or others?
Focus on stressful aspects of the individual’s envi-
ronment. Can also probe,  e.g., relationship prob-
lems, difficulties at work or school, or 
discrimination.7. Are there any kinds of stresses that make 
your [PROBLEM] worse, such as difficul-
ties with money, or family problems?
ROLE OF CULTURAL  IDENTITY
(Cultural Identity, Psychosocial Stressors, Relig ion and Spirituality, Immigrants and Refugees, 
Older Adults, Children and Adolescents)
Sometimes, aspects of people’s back-
ground or identity can make their [PROB-
LEM] better or worse. By background or 
identity,  I mean, for example, the commu-
nities you belong to, the languages you 
speak, where you or your family are from, 
your race or ethnic background, your gen-
der or sexual orientation, or your faith or 
religion.
Ask the individual to reflect  on the most salient ele-
ments of his or her cult ural identity. Use this 
information to tailor questions 9–10 as needed.8. For you, what are the most important 
aspects of your back ground or identity?
Elicit aspects of identity that make the problem bet-
ter or worse.
Probe as needed (e.g., cl inical worsening as a result 
of discrimination due to  migration status, race/
ethnicity, or sexual orientation).9. Are there any aspects of your background 
or identity that make a difference to your 
[PROBLEM]?
Probe as needed (e.g., migration-related problems; 
conflict across generations or due to gender roles).10. Are there any aspects of your background 
or identity that are causing other concerns 
or difficulties for you?
CULTURAL FACTORS AFFECTING SELF- COPING AND PAST HELP SEEKING
SELF-COPING
(Coping and Help Seeking, Religion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Caregivers, 
Psychosocial Stressors)
Clarify self-coping for the problem. 11. Sometimes people have various ways of 
dealing with problems like [PROBLEM]. 
What have you done on your own to cope 
with your [PROBLEM]?Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI) (continued)
Supplementary modules used to  expand each CFI subtopic are noted in parentheses.
GUIDE TO INTERVIEWERINSTRUCTIONS TO THE INTERVIEWER ARE 
ITALICIZED.
754 Cultural Formulation
PAST HELP SEEKING
(Coping and Help Seeking, Religion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Care givers, Psychosocial 
Stressors, Immigrants and Refu gees, Social Network, Clinician-Patient Relationship)
Elicit various sources of help (e.g., medical care, 
mental health treatment,  support groups, work-
based counseling, folk healing, religious or spiri-
tual counseling, other form s of traditional or alter-
native healing).
Probe as needed (e.g., “What other sources of help 
have you used?”).
Clarify the indivi dual’s experience and regard for 
previous help.12. Often, people look for help from many dif-
ferent sources, including different kinds of 
doctors, helpers, or healers. In the past, 
what kinds of treatment, help, advice, or 
healing have you sought for your [PROB-
LEM]?
PROBE IF DOES NOT DESCRIBE USE-
FULNESS OF HELP RECEIVED:
What types of help or treatment were most 
useful? Not useful?
BARRIERS
(Coping and Help Seeking, Religion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Psychosocial Stressors, Immi-
grants and Refugees, Social Network, Clinician-Patient Relationship)
Clarify the role of social barriers to help seeking, 
access to care, and problems engaging in previous 
treatment.
Probe details as needed (e.g., “What got in the 
way?”).13. Has anything prevented you from getting 
the help you need?
PROBE AS NEEDED:
For example, money, work or family com-
mitments, stigma or discrimination, or lack 
of services that unde rstand your language 
or background?
CULTURAL FACTORS AFFECT ING CURRENT HELP SEEKING
PREFERENCES
(Social Network, Caregivers, Re ligion and Spirituality, Older Adults, Coping and Help Seeking)
Clarify individual’s cu rrent perceived needs and 
expectations of he lp, broadly defined.
Probe if individual lists only one source of help (e.g., 
“What other kinds of help would be useful to you 
at this time?”).Now let’s talk some more about the help 
you need.
14. What kinds of help do you think would be 
most useful to you at this time for your 
[PROBLEM]?
Focus on the views of the social network regarding 
help seeking.15. Are there other kinds of help that your fam-
ily, friends, or other people have suggested 
would be helpful for you now?
CLINICIAN -PATIENT  RELATIONSHIP
(Clinician-Patient Relationship, Older Adults)
Elicit possible concerns abou t the clinic or the clini-
cian-patient relationship, including perceived rac-
ism, language barriers, or cultural differences that 
may undermine goodwill, communication, or care 
delivery.
Probe details as needed (e.g., “In what way?”).
Address possible barriers to care or concerns about 
the clinic and the clinician-patient relationship 
raised previously.Sometimes doctors and patients misunder-
stand each other because they come from 
different backgrounds or have different 
expectations.
16. Have you been concerned about this and is 
there anything that we can do to provide 
you with the care you need?Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI) (continued)
Supplementary modules used to  expand each CFI subtopic are noted in parentheses.
GUIDE TO INTERVIEWERINSTRUCTIONS TO THE INTERVIEWER ARE 
ITALICIZED.
Cultural Formulation 755
Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI)—Informant Version
The CFI–Informant Version co llects collateral information from an informant who is
knowledgeable about the clinical problems and life circumstances of the identified indi-
vidual. This version can be used to suppleme nt information obtained  from the core CFI or
can be used instead of the core CFI when the individual is unable to provide information—
as might occur, for example, with children or  adolescents, floridly  psychotic individuals,
or persons with cognitive impairment.
Cultural Formulation Interv iew (CFI)—Informant Version
GUIDE TO INTERVIEWERINSTRUCTIONS TO THE INTERVIEWER ARE 
ITALICIZED.
The following questions aim to clarify key aspects of 
the presenting cl inical problem from the infor-
mant’s point of view. Th is includes the problem’s 
meaning, potential sources of help, and expecta-
tions for services.INTRODUCTION FOR THE INFORMANT:
I would like to understand the problems that 
bring your family me mber/friend here so 
that I can help you and him/her more effec-
tively. I want to know about your  experience 
and ideas. I will ask some questions about 
what is going on and how you and your fam-
ily member/friend are dealing with it. There 
are no right or wrong answers.
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE PATIENT
Clarify the informant’s rela tionship with the indi-
vidual and/or the individual’s family.1. How would you describe your relationship 
to [INDIVIDUAL OR TO FAMILY]?
PROBE IF NOT CLEAR:
How often do you see [INDIVIDUAL]?
CULTURAL DEFINITION OF THE PROBLEM
Elicit the informant’s view  of core problems and key 
concerns.
Focus on the informant’s way of understanding the 
individual’s problem.
Use the term, expression, or brief description elicited 
in question 1 to identify the problem in subsequent 
questions (e.g., “her conflict with her son”).2. What brings your family member/friend 
here today?
IF INFORMANT GIVES FEW DETAILS OR 
ONLY MENTIONS SYMPTOMS OR A 
MEDICAL DIAGNOSIS, PROBE:
People often understand problems in their 
own way, which may be similar or differ-
ent from how doctors describe the prob-
lem. How would you describe 
[INDIVIDUAL’S] problem?
Ask how informant frames the problem for members 
of the social network.3. Sometimes people have different ways of 
describing the problem to family, friends, 
or others in their community. How would 
you describe [INDIVIDUAL’S] problem to 
them?
Focus on the aspects of the problem that matter most 
to the informant.4. What troubles you most about [INDIVID-
UAL’S] problem?
756 Cultural Formulation
CULTURAL PERCEPTIONS OF CA USE, CONTEXT, AND SUPPORT
CAUSES
This question indicates the meaning of the condition 
for the informant, which may be relevant for clini-
cal care.
Note that informants may identify multiple causes 
depending on the facet of the problem they are con-
sidering.5. Why do you think this is happening to 
[INDIVIDUAL]? What do  you think are the 
causes of his/her [PROBLEM]?
PROMPT FURTHER IF REQUIRED:
Some people may explain the problem as the 
result of bad things that happen in their life, 
problems with others, a physical illness, a 
spiritual reason, or many other causes.
Focus on the views of me mbers of the in dividual’s 
social network. These may be diverse and vary 
from the informant’s.6. What do others in [INDIVIDUAL’S] fam-
ily, his/her friends, or others in the com-
munity think is causing [INDIVIDUAL’S] 
[PROBLEM]?
STRESSORS  AND  SUPPORTS
Elicit information on the individual’s life context, 
focusing on resources, so cial supports, and resil-
ience. May also probe oth er supports (e.g., from co-
workers, from participation in religion or spiritu-
ality).7. Are there any kinds of supports that make 
his/her [PROBLEM] better, such as from 
family, friends, or others?
Focus on stressful aspects of  the individual’s environ-
ment. Can also probe, e.g., relationship problems, dif-
ficulties at work or school, or discrimination.8. Are there any kinds of stresses that make 
his/her [PROBLEM] worse, such as diffi-
culties with money, or family problems?
ROLE OF CULTURAL  IDENTITY
Sometimes, aspects of people’s background 
or identity can make the [PROBLEM] better 
or worse. By background or identity,  I mean, 
for example, the commun ities you belong to, 
the languages you speak, where you or your 
family are from, your race or ethnic back-
ground, your gender or sexual orientation, 
and your faith or religion.
Ask the informant to reflect on the most salient ele-
ments of the individual’s cu ltural identity. Use this 
information to tailor questions 10–11 as needed.9. For you, what are the most important 
aspects of [INDIVIDUAL’S] background or 
identity?
Elicit aspects of identity that make the problem bet-
ter or worse.
Probe as needed (e.g., cl inical worsening as a result 
of discrimination due to  migration status, race/
ethnicity, or sexual orientation).10. Are there any aspects of [INDIVIDUAL’S] 
background or identity that make a differ-
ence to his/her [PROBLEM]?
Probe as needed (e.g., migration-related problems; 
conflict across generations or due to gender roles).11. Are there any aspects of [INDIVIDUAL’S] 
background or identity that are causing 
other concerns or difficulties for him/her?Cultural Formulation Interv iew (CFI)—Informant Version (continued)
GUIDE TO INTERVIEWERINSTRUCTIONS TO THE INTERVIEWER ARE 
ITALICIZED.
Cultural Formulation 757
CULTURAL FACTORS AFFECTING SELF- COPING AND PAST HELP SEEKING
SELF-COPING
Clarify individual’s self-coping for the problem. 12. Sometimes people have various ways of 
dealing with problems like [PROBLEM]. 
What has [INDIVIDUAL] done on his/her 
own to cope with his/her [PROBLEM]?
PAST HELP SEEKING
Elicit various sources of help (e.g., medical care, 
mental health treatment,  support groups, work-
based counseling, folk healing, religious or spiri-
tual counseling, other alternative healing).
Probe as needed (e.g., “What other sources of help 
has he/she used?”).
Clarify the indivi dual’s experience and regard for 
previous help.13. Often, people also look for help from many 
different sources, including different kinds 
of doctors, helpers, or healers. In the past, 
what kinds of treatment, help, advice, or 
healing has [INDIVIDUAL] sought for his/
her [PROBLEM]?
PROBE IF DOES NOT DESCRIBE USE-
FULNESS OF HELP RECEIVED:
What types of help or treatment were most 
useful? Not useful?
BARRIERS
Clarify the role of social barriers to help-seeking, 
access to care, and problems engaging in previous 
treatment.14.  Has anything prevented [INDIVIDUAL] 
from getting the help he/she needs?
Probe details as needed (e.g., “What got in the 
way?”).PROBE AS NEEDED:
For example, money, work or family com-
mitments, stigma or discrimination, or lack 
of services that understand his/her lan-
guage or background?
CULTURAL FACTORS AFFECT ING CURRENT HELP SEEKING
PREFERENCES
Clarify individual’s cu rrent perceived needs and 
expectations of help, broadly defined, from the 
point of view of the informant.
Probe if informant lists only one source of help (e.g., 
“What other kinds of help would be useful to 
[INDIVIDUAL] at this time?”).Now let’s talk about the help [INDIVID-
UAL] needs.
15. What kinds of help would be most useful to 
him/her at this time for his/her [PROB-
LEM]?
Focus on the views of the social network regarding 
help seeking.16. Are there other kinds of help that [INDI-
VIDUAL’S] family, friends, or other people 
have suggested would be helpful for him/
her now?
CLINICIAN -PATIENT  RELATIONSHIP
Elicit possible concerns abou t the clinic or the clini-
cian-patient relationship, including perceived rac-
ism, language barriers, or cultural differences that 
may undermine goodwill, communication, or care 
delivery.
Probe details as needed (e.g., “In what way?”).
Address possible barriers to care or concerns about 
the clinic and the clinician-patient relationship 
raised previously.Sometimes doctors and patients misunder-
stand each other because they come from 
different backgrounds or have different 
expectations.
17. Have you been concerned about this, and is 
there anything that we can do to provide 
[INDIVIDUAL] with the care he/she 
needs?Cultural Formulation Interv iew (CFI)—Informant Version (continued)
GUIDE TO INTERVIEWERINSTRUCTIONS TO THE INTERVIEWER ARE 
ITALICIZED.
758 Cultural Formulation
Cultural Concepts of Distress
Cultural concepts of distress  refers to ways that cultural groups experience, understand, and
communicate suffering, behavioral problems, or troubling thoughts and emotions. Three
main types of cultural concepts may be distinguished. Cultural syndromes  are clusters of
symptoms and attributions that tend to co -occur among individuals in specific cultural
groups, communities, or contexts and that ar e recognized locally as coherent patterns of
experience. Cultural idioms of distress  are ways of expressing distress that may not involve
specific symptoms or syndromes, but that pr ovide collective, shared ways of experiencing
and talking about personal or social concerns . For example, everyday talk about “nerves”
or “depression” may refer to widely varying forms of suffe ring without mapping onto a
discrete set of symptoms, syndrome, or disorder. Cultural explanations  or perceived causes
are labels, attributions, or features of an ex planatory model that indicate culturally recog-
nized meaning or etiology for symptoms, illness, or distress.
These three concepts—syndromes, idioms, and explanations—are more relevant to
clinical practice than the older formulation culture-bound syndrome. Specifically, the term
culture-bound syndrome  ignores the fact that clinically important cultural differences often
involve explanations or experience of distress  rather than culturally distinctive configura-
tions of symptoms. Furthermore, the term culture-bound  overemphasizes the local partic-
ularity and limited distribution  of cultural concepts of di stress. The current formulation
acknowledges that all  forms of distress are locally shaped, including the DSM disorders.
From this perspective, many DSM diagnoses can be understood as operationalized proto-
types that started out as cultural syndromes, and became widely accepted as a result of
their clinical and research utilit y. Across groups there remain  culturally patterned differ-
ences in symptoms, ways of talking about dist ress, and locally perceived causes, which are
in turn associated with coping strategies and patterns of help seeking.
Cultural concepts arise from local folk or  professional diagnost ic systems for mental
and emotional distress, and they may also re flect the influence of biomedical concepts.
Cultural concepts have four key featur es in relation to the DSM-5 nosology:
• There is seldom a one-to-one correspondence of any cultural concept with a DSM diag-
nostic entity; the correspondence is more lik ely to be one-to-many in either direction.
Symptoms or behaviors that might be sort ed by DSM-5 into several disorders may be
included in a single folk concept, and diverse presentations that might be classified by
DSM-5 as variants of a single disorder may be  sorted into several distinct concepts by an
indigenous diagnostic system.
• Cultural concepts may apply to a wide range of severity, including presentations that
do not meet DSM criteria for any mental disorder. For example, an individual with acute
grief or a social predicament may use the same idiom of distress or display the same
cultural syndrome as another individual  with more severe psychopathology.
• In common usage, the same cultural term frequently denotes more than one type of
cultural concept. A familiar example may be the concept of “depression,” which may
be used to describe a syndrome (e.g., major depressive disorder), an idiom of distress
(e.g., as in the common expression “I feel depressed”), or a perceived cause (similar to
“stress”).
• Like culture and DSM itself, cultural concepts  may change over time in response to both
local and global influences.
Cultural concepts are important to ps ychiatric diagnosis for several reasons:
•To avoid misdiagnosis:  Cultural variation in symptoms and in explanatory models as-
sociated with these cultural co ncepts may lead clinicians to  misjudge the severity of a
Cultural Formulation 759
problem or assign the wrong diagnosis (e.g., unfamiliar spiritual explanations may be
misunderstood as psychosis).
•To obtain useful clinical information:  Cultural variations in symptoms and attribu-
tions may be associated with particular fe atures of risk, res ilience, and outcome.
•To improve clinical rapport and engagement:  “Speaking the language of the patient,”
both linguistically and in terms of his or her dominant concepts and metaphors, can re-
sult in greater communication and satisfac tion, facilitate treatment negotiation, and
lead to higher rete ntion and adherence.
•To improve therapeutic efficacy:  Culture influences the psychological mechanisms of
disorder, which need to be understood and addressed to improve clinical efficacy. For
example, culturally specific catastrophic co gnitions can contribute to symptom escala-
tion into panic attacks.
•To guide clinical research:  Locally perceived connections  between cultural concepts
may help identify patterns of comorbidity and underlying biological substrates.
•To clarify the cu ltural epidemiology:  Cultural concepts of distress are not endorsed
uniformly by everyone in a given culture. Distinguishing syndromes, idioms, and ex-
planations provides an approach for studying the distribution of cultural features of ill-
ness across settings and regions, and over time. It also suggests qu estions about cultural
determinants of risk, course, and outcome in clinical and community settings to en-
hance the evidence base of cultural research.
DSM-5 includes information on cultural conc epts in order to improve the accuracy of
diagnosis and the comprehensiveness of clinical assessment. Clinical assessment of indi-
viduals presenting with thes e cultural concepts should determine whether they meet
DSM-5 criteria for a spec ified disorder or an other specified or unspecified  diagnosis. Once the
disorder is diagnosed, the cultural terms and explanations should be included in case for-
mulations; they may help clarify symptoms and etiological a ttributions that could other-
wise be confusing. Individuals whose sympto ms do not meet DSM criteria for a specific
mental disorder may still expect  and require treatment; this should be assessed on a case-
by-case basis. In addition to the CFI and its supplementary modules, DSM-5 contains the
following information and tools that may be useful when integrating cultural information
in clinical practice:
•Data in DSM-5 criteria and text for specific disorders:  The text includes information
on cultural variations in prevalence, sy mptomatology, associate d cultural concepts,
and other clinical aspects. It is important to emphasize that there is no one-to-one cor-
respondence at the categorical level between  DSM disorders and cultural concepts. Dif-
ferential diagnosis for individuals must th erefore incorporate in formation on cultural
variation with information elicited by the CFI.
•Other Conditions That May Be a Focus of Clinical Attention: Some of the clinical con-
cerns identified by the CFI may correspond to V codes or Z code s—for example, accul-
turation problems, parent-child relational pr oblems, or religious or spiritual problems.
•Glossary of Cultural Concepts of Distress:  Located in the Appendix, this glossary pro-
vides examples of well-studied cultural concepts of distress  that illustrate the relevance
of cultural information for c linical diagnosis and s ome of the interrelationships among
cultural syndromes, idioms of di stress, and causal explanations.
This page intentionally left blank 
761Alternative DSM-5 Model for
Personality Disorders
The current approach  to personality disorders appe ars in Section II of DSM-5,
and an alternative model developed for DSM-5 is presented here in Section III. The inclu-
sion of both models in DSM-5 reflects the de cision of the APA Board of Trustees to pre-
serve continuity with current clinical practi ce, while also introducing a new approach that
aims to address numerous shor tcomings of the current approa ch to personality disorders.
For example, the typical patient meeting criter ia for a specific personality disorder fre-
quently also meets criteria for other personalit y disorders. Similarly, other specified or un-
specified personality disorder is  often the correct (but mostly  uninformative) diagnosis, in
the sense that patients do not tend to present with patterns of symptoms that correspond
with one and only one personality disorder.
In the following alternative DSM-5 model, personality disorders are characterized by
impairments in personality functioning  and pathological personality traits.  The specific
personality disorder diagnoses that may be derived from this model include antisocial,
avoidant, borderline, narcissis tic, obsessive-compulsive, an d schizotypal personality dis-
orders. This approach also includes a diagno sis of personality disorder—trait specified
(PD-TS) that can be made when a personality disorder is considered  present but the crite-
ria for a specific disorder are not met.
General Criteria for Personality Disorder
General Criteria for Personality Disorder
The essential features of a personality disorder are
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality (self/interpersonal) functioning.
B. One or more pathological personality traits.
C. The impairments in personality functioning and the individual’s personality trait expres-
sion are relatively inflexible and pervasive across a broad range of personal and social
situations.
D. The impairments in personality functioning and the individual’s personality trait expres-
sion are relatively stable across time, with onsets that can be traced back to at least
adolescence or early adulthood.
E. The impairments in personality functioning and the individual’s personality trait expres-
sion are not better explained by another mental disorder.
F. The impairments in personality functioning and the individual’s personality trait expres-
sion are not solely attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another
medical condition (e.g., severe head trauma).
G. The impairments in personality functioning and the individual’s personality trait expres-
sion are not better understood as normal for an individual’s developmental stage or so-
ciocultural environment.
762 Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders
A diagnosis of a personality disorder requires  two determinations: 1) an assessment of
the level of impairment in personality functi oning, which is needed for Criterion A, and 2)
an evaluation of pathological personality trai ts, which is required for Criterion B. The im-
pairments in personality functioning and person ality trait expression are relatively inflex-
ible and pervasive across a broad range of pers onal and social situations (Criterion C);
relatively stable across time, with onsets that can be traced back to at least adolescence or
early adulthood (Criterion D); not better explained by another mental disorder (Criterion
E); not attributable to the effects of a substance or another medical condition (Criterion F);
and not better understood as normal for an individual’s developmental stage or sociocul-
tural environment (Criterion G). All Section II I personality disorders described by criteria
sets, as well as PD-TS, meet these general criteria, by definition.
Criterion A: Level of Personality Functioning
Disturbances in self  and interpersonal  functioning constitute the core of personality psy-
chopathology and in this alternative diagnostic  model they are evaluated on a continuum.
Self functioning involves identity and sel f-direction; interpersonal functioning involves
empathy and intimacy (see Table 1). The Level of Personality Functioning Scale (LPFS; see
Table 2, pp. 775–778) uses each of these elements to differentiate five levels of impairment,
ranging from little or no impair ment (i.e., healthy, adaptive functioning; Level 0) to some
(Level 1), moderate (Level 2), severe (Lev el 3), and extreme (Level 4) impairment.
Impairment in personality functioning predicts the presence of a personality disorder,
and the severity of impairment predicts whet her an individual has more than one person-
ality disorder or one of the more typically se vere personality disorders. A moderate level
of impairment in personality functioning is re quired for the diagnosis of a personality dis-
order; this threshold is based on empirical ev idence that the moderate level of impairment
maximizes the ability of clinicians to accurate ly and efficiently identify personality disor-
der pathology.
Criterion B: Pathological Personality Traits
Pathological personality traits are organized into five broad domain s: Negative Affectiv-
ity, Detachment, Antagonism, Disinhibition, and Psychoticism. Within the five broad trait
domains  are 25 specific trait facets  that were developed initially  from a review of existing
trait models and subsequently through iterat ive research with samples of persons who
sought mental health services. The full trait taxonomy is presented in Table 3 (see pp. 779–
781). The B criteria for the spec ific personality disorders comp rise subsets of the 25 traitTABLE 1 Elements of personality functioning
Self:
1. Identity:  Experience of oneself as unique, with clear boundaries between self and others; sta-
bility of self-esteem and accuracy of self-apprai sal; capacity for, and ability to regulate, a 
range of emotional experience.
2. Self-direction:  Pursuit of coherent and meaningful short-term and life goals; utilization of 
constructive and prosocial internal standards of behavior; ability to self-reflect productively.
Interpersonal:
1.Empathy:  Comprehension and appreciation of others’ experiences and motivations; tolerance 
of differing perspectives; understanding the effects of one’s own behavior on others.
2. Intimacy:  Depth and duration of connection with ot hers; desire and capa city for closeness; 
mutuality of regard reflected in interpersonal behavior.
Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders 763
facets, based on meta-analytic reviews and empi rical data on the relationships of the traits
to DSM-IV personality disorder diagnoses.
Criteria C and D: Perv asiveness and Stability
Impairments in personality functioning an d pathological pers onality traits are relatively  per-
vasive across a range of personal and social contexts, as personality is defined as a pattern of
perceiving, relating to, and thinking about the environm ent and oneself. The term relatively
reflects the fact that all except the most extr emely pathological personalities show some de-
gree of adaptability. The pattern in personality disorders is maladaptive and relatively inflex-
ible, which leads to disabilities in social, o ccupational, or other important pursuits, as
individuals are unable to modify their thinking or behavior, even in th e face of evidence that
their approach is not working. The impairments in functioning and personality traits are also
relatively  stable. Personality traits—the dispositions  to behave or feel in certain ways—are
more stable than the symptomatic expressions of  these dispositions, but personality traits can
also change. Impairments in personality fu nctioning are more stable than symptoms.
Criteria E, F, and G: Al ternative Explanations for 
Personality Pathology (D ifferential Diagnosis)
On some occasions, what appears to be a pe rsonality disorder may be better explained by
another mental disorder, the effects of a subs tance or another medica l condition, or a nor-
mal developmental stage (e.g., adolescence, late  life) or the individu al’s sociocultural en-
vironment. When another ment al disorder is present, the diagnosis of a personality
disorder is not made, if the manifestations of  the personality disorder clearly are an ex-
pression of the other mental disorder (e.g., if  features of schizotypal personality disorder
are present only in the context of schizophren ia). On the other hand, personality disorders
can be accurately diagnosed in the presence of  another mental disord er, such as major de-
pressive disorder, and patients with other me ntal disorders should be assessed for comor-
bid personality disorders because personality disorders often impact the course of other
mental disorders. Therefore, it is always appropriate to assess personality functioning and
pathological personality traits to prov ide a context for other psychopathology.
Specific Personality Disorders
Section III includes diagnostic criteria for antisocial, avoidant , borderline, narcissistic, ob-
sessive-compulsive, and schizotypal personality disorders. Each pe rsonality disorder is
defined by typical impairments in personality functioning (Criterion A) and characteristic
pathological personality traits (Criterion B):
• Typical features of antisocial personality disorder  are a failure to conform to lawful
and ethical behavior, and an egocentric, callous lack of concern for others, accompanied
by deceitfulness, irresponsibility, manipulativeness, and/or risk taking.
• Typical features of avoidant personality disorder  are avoidance of social situations and
inhibition in interpersonal relationships related to feelings of ineptitude and inade-
quacy, anxious preoccupation with negative evaluation and rejection, and fears of rid-
icule or embarrassment.
• Typical features of borderline personality disorder are instability of self-image, per-
sonal goals, interpersonal relationships, an d affects, accompanied by impulsivity, risk
taking, and/or hostility.
• Typical features of narcissistic personality disorder  are variable and vulnerable self-
esteem, with attempts at regulation throug h attention and approval seeking, and either
overt or covert grandiosity.
764 Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders
• Typical features of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder  are difficulties in estab-
lishing and sustaining close relationships, as sociated with rigid perfectionism, inflexi-
bility, and restricted emotional expression.
• Typical features of schizotypal personality disorder  are impairments in the capacity
for social and close relationships, and eccent ricities in cognition, perception, and behav-
ior that are associated with distorted self-i mage and incoherent personal goals and ac-
companied by suspiciousness and re stricted emotional expression.
The A and B criteria for the six specific pe rsonality disorders and for PD-TS follow. All
personality disorders also meet criteria C through G of the General Criteria for Personality
Disorder.
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Typical features of antisocial personality diso rder are a failure to conform to lawful and
ethical behavior, and an egocentric, callous la ck of concern for others, accompanied by de-
ceitfulness, irresponsibility, manipulativeness, and/or risk taking. Characteristic difficul-
ties are apparent in identity, self-direction, empathy, and/or intimacy, as described below,
along with specific maladaptive traits in the domains of Antagonism and Disinhibition.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by characteristic
difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1.Identity:  Egocentrism; self-esteem derived from personal gain, power, or pleasure.
2.Self-direction: Goal setting based on personal gratification; absence of prosocial
internal standards, associated with failure to conform to lawful or culturally norma-
tive ethical behavior.
3.Empathy:  Lack of concern for feelings, needs, or suffering of others; lack of re-
morse after hurting or mistreating another.
4.Intimacy:  Incapacity for mutually intimate relationships, as exploitation is a primary
means of relating to others, including by deceit and coercion; use of dominance or
intimidation to control others.
B. Six or more of the following seven pathological personality traits:
1.Manipulativeness  (an aspect of Antagonism): Frequent use of subterfuge to in-
fluence or control others; use of seduction, charm, glibness, or ingratiation to
achieve one’s ends.
2.Callousness (an aspect of Antagonism ): Lack of concern for feelings or problems
of others; lack of guilt or remorse about the negative or harmful effects of one’s ac-
tions on others; aggression; sadism.
3.Deceitfulness (an aspect of Antagonism): Dishonesty and fraudulence; misrepre-
sentation of self; embellishment or fabrication when relating events.
4.Hostility (an aspect of Antagonism): Persistent or frequent angry feelings; anger or
irritability in response to minor slights and insults; mean, nasty, or vengeful behavior.
5.Risk taking  (an aspect of Disinhibition ): Engagement in dangerous, risky, and poten-
tially self-damaging activities, unnecessarily and without regard for consequences;
boredom proneness and thoughtless initiation of activities to counter boredom; lack of
concern for one’s limitations and denial of the reality of personal danger.
6.Impulsivity  (an aspect of Disinhibition ): Acting on the spur of the moment in re-
sponse to immediate stimuli; acting on a momentary basis without a plan or consid-
eration of outcomes; difficulty establishing and following plans.
Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders 765
7.Irresponsibility  (an aspect of Disinhibition ): Disregard for—and failure to honor—
financial and other obligations or commitments; lack of respect for—and lack of fol-
low-through on—agreements and promises.
Note. The individual is at least 18 years of age.
Specify if:
With psychopathic features.
Specifiers. A distinct variant often termed psychopathy  (or “primary” psychopathy) is
marked by a lack of anxiety or fear and by a bold interpersonal style that may mask mal-
adaptive behaviors (e.g., fraudulence). This ps ychopathic variant is characterized by low
levels of anxiousness (Negative Affectivity domain) and withdrawal (Detachment do-
main) and high levels of attention seeking (Antagonism domain). High attention seeking
and low withdrawal capture the social pote ncy (assertive/dominant) component of psy-
chopathy, whereas low anxiousness captures the stress immunity (emotional stability/re-
silience) component.
In addition to psychopathic features, trait and personality functioning specifiers may be
used to record other personality features that  may be present in anti social personality dis-
order but are not required for the diagnosis. For example, traits of Negative Affectivity (e.g.,
anxiousness), are not diagnostic criteria for antisocial personality disorder (see Criterion B)
but can be specified when appropriate. Furthe rmore, although moderate or greater impair-
ment in personality functioning is required for the diagnosis of antisocial personality disor-
der (Criterion A), the level of persona lity functioning can also be specified.
Avoidant Person ality Disorder
Typical features of avoidant personality disord er are avoidance of social situations and in-
hibition in interpersonal relationships related to feelings of inep titude and inadequacy,
anxious preoccupation with negative evaluation and rejection, and fears of ridicule or em-
barrassment. Characteristic difficulties are apparent in identity, self-direction, empathy,
and/or intimacy, as described below, along wi th specific maladaptiv e traits in the do-
mains of Negative Affectivity and Detachment.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personal ity functioning, manifest by characteristic
difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1.Identity:  Low self-esteem associated with self-appraisal as socially inept, person-
ally unappealing, or inferior; excessive feelings of shame.
2.Self-direction:  Unrealistic standards for behavior associated with reluctance to
pursue goals, take personal risks, or engage in new activities involving interper-
sonal contact.
3.Empathy:  Preoccupation with, and sensitivity to, criticism or rejection, associated
with distorted inference of others’ perspectives as negative.
4.Intimacy:  Reluctance to get involved with people unless being certain of being
liked; diminished mutuality within intimate relationships because of fear of being
shamed or ridiculed.
B. Three or more of the following four pathological personality traits, one of which must
be (1) Anxiousness:
1.Anxiousness (an aspect of Negative Affectivity): Intense feelings of nervous-
ness, tenseness, or panic, often in reaction to social situations; worry about the
negative effects of past unpleasant experiences and future negative possibilities;
766 Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders
feeling fearful, apprehensive, or threatened by uncertainty; fears of embarrass-
ment.
2.Withdrawal (an aspect of Detachment ): Reticence in social situations; avoidance
of social contacts and activity; lack of initiation of social contact.
3.Anhedonia  (an aspect of Detachment ): Lack of enjoyment from, engagement in,
or energy for life’s experiences; deficits in the capacity to feel pleasure or take in-
terest in things.
4.Intimacy avoidance (an aspect of Detachment ): Avoidance of close or romantic
relationships, interpersonal attachments, and intimate sexual relationships.
Specifiers. Considerable heterogeneity in the form of additional personality traits is
found among individuals diagnosed with avoida nt personality disorder. Trait and level of
personality functioning specifiers can be used  to record additional personality features
that may be present in avoidant personality disorder. For example, other Negative Affec-
tivity traits (e.g., depressivity, separation insecurity, submissiveness, suspiciousness, hos-
tility) are not diagnostic criter ia for avoidant personality disorder (see Criterion B) but can
be specified when appropriate. Furthermore, although moderate or greater impairment in
personality functioning is required for the diag nosis of avoidant personality disorder (Cri-
terion A), the level of personality functioning also can be specified.
Borderline Personality Disorder
Typical features of borderline  personality disorder are instability of self-image, personal
goals, interpersonal relationships, and affect s, accompanied by impulsivity, risk taking,
and/or hostility. Characteristic difficulties are apparent in identity, self-direction, empa-
thy, and/or intimacy, as described below, along with specific maladaptive traits in the do-
main of Negative Affectivity, and also Antagonism and/or Disinhibition.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by characteristic
difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1.Identity:  Markedly impoverished, poorly developed, or unstable self-image, often
associated with excessive self-criticism; chronic feelings of emptiness; dissociative
states under stress.
2.Self-direction: Instability in goals, aspirations, values, or career plans.
3.Empathy:  Compromised ability to recognize the feelings and needs of others asso-
ciated with interpersonal hypersensitivity (i.e., prone to feel slighted or insulted); per-
ceptions of others selectively biased toward negative attributes or vulnerabilities.
4.Intimacy:  Intense, unstable, and conflicted close relationships, marked by mistrust,
neediness, and anxious preoccupation with real or imagined abandonment; close
relationships often viewed in extremes of idealization and devaluation and alternat-
ing between overinvolvement and withdrawal.
B. Four or more of the following seven pathological personality traits, at least one of which
must be (5) Impulsivity, (6) Risk taking, or (7) Hostility:
1.Emotional lability  (an aspect of Negative Affectivity): Unstable emotional expe-
riences and frequent mood changes; emotions that are easily aroused, intense,
and/or out of proportion to events and circumstances.
2.Anxiousness (an aspect of Negative Affectivity): Intense feelings of nervous-
ness, tenseness, or panic, often in reaction to interpersonal stresses; worry about
the negative effects of past unpleasant experiences and future negative possibili-
Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders 767
ties; feeling fearful, apprehensive, or threatened by uncertainty; fears of falling
apart or losing control.
3.Separation insecurity  (an aspect of Negative Affectivity ): Fears of rejection by—
and/or separation from—significant others, associated with fears of excessive de-
pendency and complete loss of autonomy.
4.Depressivity  (an aspect of Negative Affectivity): Frequent feelings of being down,
miserable, and/or hopeless; difficulty recovering from such moods; pessimism
about the future; pervasive shame; feelings of inferior self-worth; thoughts of sui-
cide and suicidal behavior.
5.Impulsivity  (an aspect of Disinhibition ): Acting on the spur of the moment in re-
sponse to immediate stimuli; acting on a momentary basis without a plan or consid-
eration of outcomes; difficulty establishing or following plans; a sense of urgency
and self-harming behavior under emotional distress.
6.Risk taking  (an aspect of Disinhibition ): Engagement in dangerous, risky, and po-
tentially self-damaging activities, unnecessarily and without regard to conse-
quences; lack of concern for one’s limitations and denial of the reality of personal
danger.
7.Hostility (an aspect of Antagonism): Persistent or frequent angry feelings; anger
or irritability in response to minor slights and insults.
Specifiers. Trait and level of personalit y functioning specifiers may be used to record ad-
ditional personality features that may be pres ent in borderline personality disorder but are
not required for the diagnosis. For example, traits of Psychoticism (e.g., cognitive and per-
ceptual dysregulation) are not diagnostic crit eria for borderline personality disorder (see
Criterion B) but can be specif ied when appropriate. Furthermore, although moderate or
greater impairment in personality functioning is required for the di agnosis of borderline
personality disorder (Criterion A), the level of personality func tioning can also be specified.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Typical features of narcissistic personality disorder are variable and vulnerable self-esteem,
with attempts at regulation through attentio n and approval seeking, and either overt or
covert grandiosity. Characteristic difficulties are apparent in identity, self-direction, em-
pathy, and/or intimacy, as desc ribed below, along with specif ic maladaptive traits in the
domain of Antagonism.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by characteristic
difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1.Identity:  Excessive reference to others for self-definition and self-esteem regula-
tion; exaggerated self-appraisal inflated or deflated, or vacillating between extremes;
emotional regulation mirrors fl uctuations in self-esteem.
2.Self-direction:  Goal setting based on gaining approval from others; personal stan-
dards unreasonably high in order to see oneself as exceptional, or too low based
on a sense of entitlement; often unaware of own motivations.
3.Empathy:  Impaired ability to recognize or identify with the feelings and needs of
others; excessively attuned to reactions of others, but only if perceived as relevant
to self; over- or underestimate of own effect on others.
4.Intimacy:  Relationships largely superficial and exist to serve self-esteem regula-
tion; mutuality constrained by little genuine interest in others’ experiences and pre-
dominance of a need for personal gain.
768 Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders
B. Both of the following pathological personality traits:
1.Grandiosity (an aspect of Antagonism ): Feelings of entitlement, either overt or co-
vert; self-centeredness; firmly holding to the belief that one is better than others;
condescension toward others.
2.Attention seeking  (an aspect of Antagonism ): Excessive attempts to attract and
be the focus of the attention of others; admiration seeking.
Specifiers. Trait and personality functioning specifie rs may be used to record additional
personality features that may be  present in narcissistic person ality disorder but are not re-
quired for the diagnosis. For example, other traits of Antagonism (e.g., manipulativeness, de-
ceitfulness, callousness) are not diagnostic criteria for narcissistic personality disorder (see
Criterion B) but can be specified when more pervasive antagonistic features (e.g., “malignant
narcissism”) are present. Other traits of Negative Affectivity (e.g., depressivity, anxiousness)
can be specified to record more “vulnerable”  presentations. Furthermore, although moderate
or greater impairment in person ality functioning is required for the diagnosis of narcissistic
personality disorder (Criterion A), the level of  personality functioning can also be specified.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
Typical features of obsessive-compulsive person ality disorder are difficulties in establish-
ing and sustaining close relationships, associated with rigid perfectionism, inflexibility,
and restricted emotional expression. Characteristic difficulties are apparent in identity,
self-direction, empathy, and/or intimacy, as described below, along with specific mal-
adaptive traits in the domains of Ne gative Affectivity and/or Detachment.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by characteristic
difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1.Identity:  Sense of self derived predominantly fr om work or productivity; constricted
experience and expression of strong emotions.
2.Self-direction: Difficulty completing tasks and realizing goals, associated with rigid
and unreasonably high and inflexible internal standards of behavior; overly consci-
entious and moralistic attitudes.
3.Empathy:  Difficulty understanding and appreciating the ideas, feelings, or behav-
iors of others.
4.Intimacy:  Relationships seen as secondary to work and productivity; rigidity and
stubbornness negatively affect relationships with others.
B. Three or more of the following four pathological personality traits, one of which must
be (1) Rigid perfectionism:
1.Rigid perfectionism  (an aspect of extreme Conscientiousness [the opposite pole
of Disinhibition]): Rigid insistence on everything being flawless, perfect, and without
errors or faults, including one’s own and ot hers’ performance; sacrificing of timeli-
ness to ensure correctness in every detail; believing that there is only one right way
to do things; difficulty changing ideas and/or viewpoint; preoccupation with details,
organization, and order.
2.Perseveration  (an aspect of Negative Affectivity ): Persistence at tasks long after
the behavior has ceased to be functional or effective; continuance of the same be-
havior despite repeated failures.
3.Intimacy avoidance (an aspect of Detachment ): Avoidance of close or romantic
relationships, interpersonal attachments, and intimate sexual relationships.
Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders 769
4.Restricted affectivity (an aspect of Detachment ): Little reaction to emotionally
arousing situations; constricted emotional experience and expression; indifference
or coldness.
Specifiers. Trait and personality functioning specifie rs may be used to record additional
personality features that may be  present in obsessive-compulsive personality disorder but are
not required for the diagnosis. Fo r example, other traits of Negative Affectivity (e.g., anxious-
ness) are not diagnostic criteria  for obsessive-compulsive personal ity disorder (see Criterion B)
but can be specified when appropriate. Furthe rmore, although moderate or greater impair-
ment in personality functioning is required for the diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive person-
ality disorder (Criterion A), the level of personality functioning can also be specified.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Typical features of schizotypal personality diso rder are impairments in the capacity for so-
cial and close relationships and eccentricities in cognition, perception, and behavior that
are associated with distorted self-image an d incoherent personal goals and accompanied
by suspiciousness and restricted emotional ex pression. Characteristic difficulties are ap-
parent in identity, self-direction, empathy, and/or intimacy, along with specific maladap-
tive traits in the domains of Psychoticism and Detachment.
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by characteristic
difficulties in two or more of the following four areas:
1.Identity:  Confused boundaries between self and others; distorted self-concept;
emotional expression often not congruent with context or internal experience.
2.Self-direction:  Unrealistic or incoherent goals; no clear set of internal standards.
3.Empathy:  Pronounced difficulty understanding impact of own behaviors on others;
frequent misinterpretations of others’ motivations and behaviors.
4.Intimacy:  Marked impairments in developing close relationships, associated with
mistrust and anxiety.
B. Four or more of the following six pathological personality traits:
1.Cognitive and perceptual dysregulation  (an aspect of Psychoticism ): Odd or
unusual thought processes; vague, circumstantial, metaphorical, overelaborate, or
stereotyped thought or speech; odd sensations in various sensory modalities.
2.Unusual beliefs and experiences  (an aspect of Psychoticism ): Thought content
and views of reality that are viewed by others as bizarre or idiosyncratic; unusual
experiences of reality.
3.Eccentricity  (an aspect of Psychoticism ): Odd, unusual, or bizarre behavior or
appearance; saying unusual or inappropriate things.
4.Restricted affectivity (an aspect of Detachment ): Little reaction to emotionally
arousing situations; constricted emotional experience and expression; indifference
or coldness.
5.Withdrawal (an aspect of Detachment ): Preference for being alone to being with
others; reticence in social situations; avoidance of social contacts and activity; lack
of initiation of social contact.
6.Suspiciousness (an aspect of Detachment ): Expectations of—and heightened
sensitivity to—signs of interpersonal ill-intent or harm; doubts about loyalty and fi-
delity of others; feelings of persecution.
770 Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders
Specifiers. Trait and personality functioning specifie rs may be used to record additional
personality features that may be present in sc hizotypal personality disorder but are not re-
quired for the diagnosis. For ex ample, traits of Negative Affectivity (e.g., depressivity,
anxiousness) are not diagnostic criteria for sc hizotypal personality disorder (see Criterion
B) but can be specified when appropriate. Fu rthermore, although moderate or greater im-
pairment in personality functioning is required  for the diagnosis of schizotypal personal-
ity disorder (Criterion A), the level of pe rsonality functioning can also be specified.
Personality Disorder —Trait Specified
Proposed Diagnostic Criteria
A. Moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning, manifested by difficulties in
two or more of the following four areas:
1.Identity
2.Self-direction
3.Empathy
4.Intimacy
B. One or more pathological personality trait domains OR specific trait facets within do-
mains, considering ALL of the following domains:
1.Negative Affectivity (vs. Emotional Stability): Frequent and intense experiences
of high levels of a wide range of negative emotions (e.g., anxiety, depression, guilt/
shame, worry, anger), and their behavioral (e.g., self-harm) and interpersonal (e.g.,
dependency) manifestations.
2.Detachment  (vs. Extraversion): Avoidance of socioemotional experience, includ-
ing both withdrawal from interpersonal interactions, ranging from casual, daily in-
teractions to friendships to intimate relationships, as well as restricted affective
experience and expression, particularly limited hedonic capacity.
3.Antagonism (vs. Agreeableness): Behaviors that  put the individual at odds with
other people, including an exaggerated sense of self-importance and a concomi-
tant expectation of special treatment, as well as a callous antipathy toward others,
encompassing both unawareness of others’ needs and feelings, and a readiness
to use others in the service of self-enhancement.
4.Disinhibition  (vs. Conscientiousness): Orientation toward immediate gratification,
leading to impulsive behavior driven by current thoughts, feelings, and external
stimuli, without regard for past learning or consideration of future consequences.
5.Psychoticism  (vs. Lucidity): Exhibiting a wide range of culturally incongruent odd,
eccentric, or unusual behaviors and cognitions, including both process (e.g., per-
ception, dissociation) and content (e.g., beliefs).
Subtypes. Because personality features vary continuously along multiple trait dimen-
sions, a comprehensive set of potential expr essions of PD-TS can be represented by DSM-
5’s dimensional model of maladaptive personality trait variants (see Table 3, pp. 779–781).
Thus, subtypes are unnecessary for PD-TS, and instead, the descriptiv e elements that con-
stitute personality are provided, arranged in  an empirically based model. This arrange-
ment allows clinicians to tailor the descript ion of each individual’s personality disorder
profile, considering all five broad domains of personality trait variation and drawing on
the descriptive features of these domains as  needed to characterize the individual.
Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders 771
Specifiers. The specific personality features of in dividuals are always recorded in eval-
uating Criterion B, so the comb ination of personality features characterizing an individual
directly constitutes the specifiers in each case. For example, two individuals who are both
characterized by emotional lability, hostility, and depressivity may differ such that the
first individual is characterized additionally by callousness, whereas the second is not.
Personality Disorder Scoring Algorithms
The requirement for any two of the four A criter ia for each of the six personality disorders
was based on maximizing the relationship of these criteria to their corresponding person-
ality disorder. Diagnostic thresholds for the B criteria were also set empirically to minimize
change in prevalence of the disorders from DSM-IV an d overlap with other personality
disorders, and to maximize relationships with functional impairment. The resulting diag-
nostic criteria sets represent clinically usef ul personality disorders with high fidelity, in
terms of core impairments in personality functioning of varying degr ees of severity and
constellations of pathological personality traits.
Personality Disorder Diagnosis
Individuals who have a pattern of impairment  in personality functioning and maladaptive
traits that matches one of the six defined personality disorders should be diagnosed with
that personality disorder. If an individual also  has one or even several prominent traits that
may have clinical relevance in addition to those requ ired for the diagnosis (e.g., see narcis-
sistic personality disorder), the option exists for these to be noted as specifiers. Individuals
whose personality functioning or trait pattern is substantially different from that of any of
the six specific personality disorders should be diagnosed with PD-T S. The individual may
not meet the required number of A or B criter ia and, thus, have a su bthreshold presentation
of a personality disorder. The individual may have a mix of features of personality disorder
types or some features that are less characteri stic of a type and more accurately considered
a mixed or atypical presentation. The specific level of impairment in personality function-
ing and the pathological personality traits that characterize the individual’s personality can
be specified for PD-TS, using the Level of Personality Functioning Scale (Table 2) and the
pathological trait taxonomy (T able 3). The current diagnoses of paranoid, schizoid, histri-
onic, and dependent personality disorders are represented also by the diagnosis of PD-TS;
these are defined by moderate or greater impairment in personality functioning and can be
specified by the relevant pathological personality trait combinations.
Level of Personality Functioning
Like most human tendencies, personality func tioning is distributed on a continuum. Cen-
tral to functioning and adaptation are indivi duals’ characteristic ways of thinking about
and understanding themselves and their intera ctions with others. An optimally function-
ing individual has a complex, fully elaborat ed, and well-integrated psychological world
that includes a mostly positive,  volitional, and adaptive self-concept; a rich, broad, and ap-
propriately regulated emotional life; and the ca pacity to behave as a productive member of
society with reciprocal and fulfilling interper sonal relationships. At the opposite end of
the continuum, an individual with severe personality pathology has an impoverished, dis-
organized, and/or conflicted psychological world that includes a weak, unclear, and mal-
adaptive self-concept; a propensity to negative, dysregulated emotions; and a deficient
capacity for adaptive interpersona l functioning and social behavior.
772 Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders
Self- and Interpersonal  Functioning 
Dimensional Definition
Generalized severity may be the most import ant single predictor of concurrent and pro-
spective dysfunction in assessing personalit y psychopathology. Pers onality disorders are
optimally characterized by a generalized pers onality severity continuum with additional
specification of stylistic elem ents, derived from personalit y disorder symptom constella-
tions and personality traits. At the same time , the core of personality psychopathology is
impairment in ideas and feelin gs regarding self and interper sonal relationships; this no-
tion is consistent with multiple theories of personality disorder and their research bases. The
components of the Level of Personality Func tioning Scale—identity, self-direction, empa-
thy, and intimacy (see Table 1)—are particularly  central in describing a personality func-
tioning continuum.
Mental representations of the self and interpersonal relationships are reciprocally in-
fluential and inextricably tied , affect the nature of interaction with mental health pro-
fessionals, and can have a significant impact  on both treatment efficacy and outcome,
underscoring the importance of assessing an individual’s characteristic self-concept as
well as views of other people and relationships. Although the degree of disturbance in the
self and interpersonal functioning is continuous ly distributed, it is useful to consider the
level of impairment in functioning for clinical characterization and for treatment planning
and prognosis.
Rating Level of Pers onality Functioning
To use the Level of Personality Functioning Sc ale (LPFS), the clinician selects the level that
most closely captures  the individual’s current overall  level of impairment in personality func-
tioning. The rating is necessary for the diagnosi s of a personality disord er (moderate or greater
impairment) and can be used to specify the seve rity of impairment pr esent for an individual
with any personality disorder at  a given point in time. The LPFS may also be used as a global
indicator of personality functi oning without specification of a personality disorder diagnosis,
or in the event that personality impairment  is subthreshold for a disorder diagnosis.
Personality Traits
Definition and Description
Criterion B in the alternative model involves assessments of personality traits that are
grouped into five domains. A personality trait is a tendency to feel, perceive, behave, and
think in relatively consistent ways across time  and across situations in which the trait may
manifest. For example, individuals with a high level of the personality trait of anxiousness
would tend to feel anxious readily, including in circumstances in which most people
would be calm and relaxed.  Individuals high in trait anxiousness also would perceive  sit-
uations to be anxiety-provoking more freque ntly than would individuals with lower lev-
els of this trait, and those high in the trait would tend to behave  so as to avoid situations that
they think  would make them anxious. They would thereby tend to think  about the world as
more anxiety provoking than other people.
Importantly, individuals high in trait anxiousness would not nece ssarily be anxious at
all times and in all situations. Individuals’ trait levels also can and do change throughout
life. Some changes are very general and reflect maturation (e.g., teenagers generally are
higher on trait impulsivity than are older ad ults), whereas other ch anges reflect individ-
uals’ life experiences.
Dimensionality of personality traits. All individuals can be located on the spectrum of
trait dimensions; that is, personality traits apply to everyone in different degrees rather
Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders 773
than being present versus absent. Moreover, personality traits, including those identified
specifically in the Section III model, exist on a spectrum with two opposing poles. For ex-
ample, the opposite of the trait of callousness is the tendency to be empathic and kind-
hearted, even in circumstances in which most persons would not feel that way. Hence, al-
though in Section III th is trait is labeled callousness, because that pole of the dimension is
the primary focus, it coul d be described in full as callousness versus kind-heartedness.  More-
over, its opposite pole can be  recognized and may not be adaptive in all circumstances
(e.g., individuals who, due to extreme kind-heartedness, repeatedly allow themselves to
be taken advantage of by unscrupulous others).
Hierarchical structure of personality. Some trait terms are quite specific (e.g., “talkative”)
and describe a narrow range of behaviors, wh ereas others are quite broad (e.g., Detach-
ment) and characterize a wide range of beha vioral propensities. Broad trait dimensions
are called domains, and specific trait dimensions are called facets.  Personality trait domains
comprise a spectrum of more specific personality facets  that tend to occur together. For ex-
ample, withdrawal and anhedonia are specific trait facets  in the trait domain  of Detachment.
Despite some cross-cultural variation in pe rsonality trait facets, the broad domains they
collectively comprise are relati vely consistent across cultures.
The Personality Trait Model
The Section III personality trait system includ es five broad domains of personality trait
variation—Negative Affectivity (vs. Emotiona l Stability), Detachment (vs. Extraversion),
Antagonism (vs. Agreeableness), Disinhibition  (vs. Conscientiousness), and Psychoticism
(vs. Lucidity)—comprising 25 specific personalit y trait facets. Table 3 provides definitions
of all personality domains and facets. These five broad domains are maladaptive variants
of the five domains of the extensively valid ated and replicated personality model known
as the “Big Five”, or Five Factor Model of pe rsonality (FFM), and are also similar to the do-
mains of the Personality Psychopathology Five (PSY-5). The specific 25 facets represent a
list of personality facets chosen for their clinical relevance.
Although the Trait Model focuses on persona lity traits associated with psychopathol-
ogy, there are healthy, adaptive, and resilien t personality traits identified as the polar
opposites of these traits, as noted in the pa rentheses above (i.e., Em otional Stability, Ex-
traversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and Lucidity). Their presence can greatly
mitigate the effects of mental disorders and facilitate coping and re covery from traumatic
injuries and other medical illness.
Distinguishing Traits, Symptoms, and Specific Behaviors
Although traits are by no means immutable and do change throughout the life span, they
show relative consistency compared with sy mptoms and specific behaviors. For example,
a person may behave impulsively at a specific ti me for a specific reason (e.g., a person who
is rarely impulsive suddenly decides to spend a great deal of money on a particular item
because of an unusual opportunity to purchase  something of unique value), but it is only
when behaviors aggregate across time and circumstance, such that a pattern of behavior
distinguishes between individuals, that they re flect traits. Nevertheless, it is important to
recognize, for example,  that even people wh o are impulsive are not acting impulsively all
of the time. A trait is a tendency or dispositio n toward specific behaviors; a specific behav-
ior is an instance or manifestation of a trait.
Similarly, traits are distin guished from most symptoms  because symptoms tend to
wax and wane, whereas traits are relatively more stable. For example, individuals with
higher levels of depressivity  have a greater likelihood of experiencing discrete episodes of a
depressive disorder and of showing the sympto ms of these disorders, such difficulty con-
centrating. However, even patients  who have a trait propensity to depressivity  typically cy-
cle through distinguishable episodes of mood disturbance, and specific symptoms such as
774 Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders
difficulty concentrating tend to wax and wane in  concert with specific episodes, so they do
not form part of the trait definition. Import antly, however, symptoms and traits are both
amenable to intervention, and many interven tions targeted at symptoms can affect the
longer term patterns of pers onality functioning that are ca ptured by personality traits.
Assessment of the DSM-5 Section III 
Personality Trait Model
The clinical utility of the Section III multidimensio nal personality trait model lies in its ability
to focus attention on multiple relevant areas of personality variation in each individual patient.
Rather than focusing attention on the identification of one and only one optimal diagnostic
label, clinical ap plication of the Section III personality trait model involves reviewing all five
broad personality domains portrayed in Table 3. The clinical approach to personality is similar
to the well-known review of systems in clinical medicine. For example, an individual’s pre-
senting complaint may focus on a specific ne urological symptom, yet during an initial
evaluation clinicians still systematically review  functioning in all relevant systems (e.g., car-
diovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal), lest  an important area of diminished functioning
and corresponding opportunity for effective intervention be missed.
Clinical use of the Section III personality trait model proceeds similarly. An initial in-
quiry reviews all five broad doma ins of personality. This systematic review is facilitated
by the use of formal psychome tric instruments designed to me asure specific facets and do-
mains of personality. For example, the person ality trait model is operationalized in the
Personality Inventory for DSM-5 (PID-5), which can be completed in its self-report form by
patients and in its informant-report form by those who know the patient well (e.g., a
spouse). A detailed clinical assessment would involve collect ion of both patient- and in-
formant-report data on all 25 facets of the pe rsonality trait model. However, if this is not
possible, due to time or other co nstraints, assessment focused at the five-domain level is an
acceptable clinical option when only a general (vs. detailed) portrait of a patient’s person-
ality is needed (see Criterion B of PD-TS). Ho wever, if personality- based problems are the
focus of treatment, then it will be important to assess individual s’ trait facets as well as do-
mains.
Because personality traits are continuously distributed in the population, an approach
to making the judgment that a specific trait is elevated (and therefor e is present for diag-
nostic purposes) could involve comparing indi viduals’ personality tr ait levels with pop-
ulation norms and/or clinical judgment. If a trait is elevated—that is, formal psychometric
testing and/or interview data support the clinical judgment of elevation—then it is con-
sidered as contributing to meeting Criterion B of Section III personality disorders.
Clinical Utility of the Multidimensional Personality 
Functioning a nd Trait Model
Disorder and trait constructs each add value to the other in  predicting important anteced-
ent (e.g., family history, hist ory of child abuse), concurrent (e.g., functional impairment,
medication use), and predictive (e.g., hospit alization, suicide attempts) variables. DSM-5
impairments in personality functioning and pa thological personality traits each contrib-
ute independently to clinical decisions about degree of disability; risks for self-harm, vio-
lence, and criminality; reco mmended treatment type and intensity; and prognosis—all
important aspects of the utility of psychiatric diagnoses. Notably, knowing the level of an
individual’s personality functioning and his or  her pathological trait profile also provides
the clinician with a rich base of information and is valuable in treatment planning and in
predicting the course and outcome of many me ntal disorders in addition to personality
disorders. Therefore, assessment of persona lity functioning and pathological personality
traits may be relevant whether an indivi dual has a personality disorder or not.
Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders 775TABLE 2 Level of Personality Functioning Scale
SELF INTERPERSONAL
Level of 
impairment Identity Self-d irection Empathy Intimacy
0—Little or no 
impairmentHas ongoing awareness of a 
unique self; maintains role-
appropriate boundaries.
Has consistent and self-regulated 
positive self-esteem, with accu-
rate self-appraisal.
Is capable of experiencing, toler-
ating, and regulating a full 
range of emotions.Sets and aspires to reasonable 
goals based on a realistic 
assessment of personal 
capacities.
Utilizes appropriate stan-
dards of behavior, attaining 
fulfillment in multiple 
realms.
Can reflect on, and make con-
structive meaning of, inter-
nal experience.Is capable of accurately under-
standing others’ experiences 
and motivations in most situ-
ations.
Comprehends and appreciates 
others’ perspectives, even if 
disagreeing.
Is aware of the effect of own 
actions on others.Maintains multiple satisfying and 
enduring relationships in personal 
and community life.
Desires and engages in a number of 
caring, close, and reciprocal rela-
tionships.
Strives for cooperation and mutual 
benefit and flexibly responds to a 
range of others’ ideas, emotions, 
and behaviors.
1—Some 
impairmentHas relatively intact sense of self, 
with some decrease in clarity of 
boundaries when strong emo-
tions and mental distress are 
experienced.
Self-esteem dimini shed at times, 
with overly critical or some-
what distorted self-appraisal.
Strong emotions may be distress-
ing, associated with a restric-
tion in range of emotional 
experience.Is excessively goal-directed, 
somewhat goal-inhibited, or 
conflicted about goals.
May have an unrealistic or 
socially inappropriate set of 
personal standards, limiting 
some aspects of fulfillment.
Is able to reflect on internal 
experiences, but may over-
emphasize a single (e.g., 
intellectual, emotional) type 
of self-knowledge.Is somewhat compromised in 
ability to appreciate and 
understand others’ experi-
ences; may tend to see others 
as having unreasonable 
expectations or a wish for 
control.
Although capable of consider-
ing and understanding dif-
ferent perspectives, resists 
doing so.
Has inconsistent awareness of 
effect of own behavior on 
others.Is able to establish enduring rela-
tionships in personal and commu-
nity life, with some limitations on 
degree of depth and satisfaction.
Is capable of forming and desires to 
form intimate and reciprocal rela-
tionships, but may be inhibited in 
meaningful expression and some-
times constrained if intense emo-
tions or conflicts arise.
Cooperation may be inhibited by 
unrealistic standards; somewhat 
limited in ability to respect or 
respond to others’ ideas, emo-
tions, and behaviors.
776 Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders2—Moderate 
impairmentDepends excessively on others 
for identity definition, with 
compromised boundary delin-
eation.
Has vulnerable self-esteem con-
trolled by exaggerated concern 
about external evaluation, with 
a wish for approval. Has sense 
of incompleteness or inferior-
ity, with compensatory 
inflated, or deflated, 
self-appraisal.
Emotional regulation depends 
on positive external appraisal. 
Threats to self-esteem may 
engender strong emotions such 
as rage or shame.Goals are more often a means 
of gaining external approval 
than self-generated, and 
thus may lack coherence 
and/or stability.
Personal standards may be 
unreasonably high (e.g., a 
need to be special or please 
others) or low (e.g., not con-
sonant with prevailing 
social values). Fulfillment is 
compromised by a sense of 
lack of authenticity.
Has impaired capacity to 
reflect on internal experi-
ence.Is hyperattuned to the experi-
ence of others, but only with 
respect to perceived rele-
vance to self.
Is excessively self-referential; 
significantly compromised 
ability to appreciate and 
understand others’ experi-
ences and to co nsider alterna-
tive perspectives.
Is generally unaware of or 
unconcerned about effect of 
own behavior on others, or 
unrealistic appraisal of own 
effect.Is capable of forming and desires to 
form relationships in personal and 
community life, but connections 
may be largely superficial.
Intimate relationships are predomi-
nantly based on meeting self-regu-
latory and self-esteem needs, with 
an unrealistic expectation of being 
perfectly understood by others.
Tends not to view relationships in 
reciprocal terms, and cooperates 
predominantly for personal gain.TABLE 2 Level of Personality Functioning Scale (continued)
SELF INTERPERSONAL
Level of 
impairment Identity Self-d irection Empathy Intimacy
Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders 7773—Severe 
impairmentHas a weak sense of autonomy/
agency; experience of a lack of 
identity, or emptiness. Bound-
ary definition is poor or rigid: 
may show overidentification 
with others, overemphasis on 
independence from others, or 
vacillation between these.
Fragile self-esteem is easily influ-
enced by events, and self-image 
lacks coherence. Self-appraisal 
is un-nuanced: self-loathing, 
self-aggrandizing, or an illogi-
cal, unrealistic combination.
Emotions may be rapidly shifting 
or a chronic, unwavering feel-
ing of despair.Has difficulty establishing 
and/or achieving personal 
goals.
Internal standards for behav-
ior are unclear or contradic-
tory. Life is experienced as 
meaningless or dangerous.
Has significantly compro-
mised ability to reflect on 
and understand own mental 
processes.Ability to consider and under-
stand the thoughts, feelings, 
and behavior of other people 
is significantly limited; may 
discern very specific aspects 
of others’ experience, particu-
larly vulnerabilities and suf-
fering.
Is generally unable to consider 
alternative perspectives; 
highly threatened by differ-
ences of opinion or alterna-
tive viewpoints.
Is confused about or unaware 
of impact of own actions on 
others; often bewildered 
about peoples’ thoughts and 
actions, with destructive 
motivations frequently 
misattributed to others.Has some desire to form relation-
ships in community and personal 
life is present, but capacity for pos-
itive and enduring connections is 
significantly impaired.
Relationships are based on a strong 
belief in the absolute need for the 
intimate other(s), and/or expecta-
tions of abandonment or abuse. 
Feelings about intimate involve-
ment with others alternate 
between fear/rejection and des-
perate desire for connection.
Little mutuality: others are concep-
tualized primarily in terms of how 
they affect the se lf (negatively or 
positively); cooperative efforts are 
often disrupted due to the percep-
tion of slights from others.TABLE 2 Level of Personality Functioning Scale (continued)
SELF INTERPERSONAL
Level of 
impairment Identity Self-d irection Empathy Intimacy
778 Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders4—Extreme 
impairmentExperience of a unique self and 
sense of agency/autonomy are 
virtually absent, or are orga-
nized around perceived exter-
nal persecution. Boundaries 
with others are confused or 
lacking.
Has weak or distorted self-image 
easily threatened by interac-
tions with others; significant 
distortions and confusion 
around self-appraisal.
Emotions not congruent with 
context or internal experience. 
Hatred and aggression may be 
dominant affects, although they 
may be disavowed and attrib-
uted to others.Has poor differentiation of 
thoughts from actions, so 
goal-setting ability is 
severely compromised, with 
unrealistic or incoherent 
goals.
Internal standards for behav-
ior are virtually lacking. 
Genuine fulfillment is virtu-
ally inconceivable.
Is profoundly unable to con-
structively reflect on own 
experience. Personal moti-
vations may be unrecog-
nized and/or experienced 
as external to self.Has pronounced inability to 
consider and understand 
others’ experience and 
motivation.
Attention to others’ perspec-
tives is virtually absent 
(attention is hypervigilant, 
focused on need fulfillment 
and harm avoidance).
Social interactions can be 
confusing and disorienting.Desire for affiliation is limited 
because of profound disinterest or 
expectation of harm. Engagement 
with others is detached, disorga-
nized, or consistently negative.
Relationships are conceptualized 
almost exclusively in terms of 
their ability to provide comfort or 
inflict pain and suffering.
Social/interpersonal behavior is not 
reciprocal; rather, it seeks fulfill-
ment of basic needs or escape from 
pain.TABLE 2 Level of Personality Functioning Scale (continued)
SELF INTERPERSONAL
Level of 
impairment Identity Self-d irection Empathy Intimacy
Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders 779
TABLE 3 Definitions of DSM-5 personality disorder trait domains 
and facets
DOMAINS (Polar Opposites) 
and Facets Definitions
NEGATIVE AFFECTIVITY 
(vs. Emotional Stability)Frequent and intense experiences of high levels of a wide range of 
negative emotions (e.g., anxiet y, depression, guilt/ shame, worry, 
anger) and their behavioral (e.g., self-harm) and interpersonal (e.g., 
dependency) manifestations.
Emotional lability Instability of emotional experiences and mood; emotions that are 
easily aroused, intense, and/or out of proportion to events and cir-
cumstances.
Anxiousness Feelings of nervousness, tensenes s, or panic in reaction to diverse situa-
tions; frequent worry about the negative effects of past unpleasant 
experiences and future negative possibilities; feeling fearful and 
apprehensive about un certainty; expecting the worst to happen.
Separation insecurity Fears of being alone due to rejection by—and /or separation from—
significant others, based in a lack of confidence in one’s ability to 
care for oneself, both ph ysically and emotionally.
Submissiveness Adaptation of one’s behavior to the actual or perceived interests and 
desires of others even when doing so is antithetical to one’s own 
interests, needs, or desires.
Hostility Persistent or frequent angry feelings; anger or irritability in response 
to minor slights and insults; mean, nasty, or vengeful behavior. See 
also Antagonism.
Perseveration Persistence at tasks or in a particular way of doing things long after the 
behavior has ceased to be functional  or effective; co ntinuance of the 
same behavior despite repeated fail ures or clear reasons for stopping.
Depressivity See Detachment.
Suspiciousness See Detachment.
Restricted affectivity 
(lack of)The lack of  this facet characterizes low levels  of Negative Affectivity. 
See Detachment for definition of this facet.
DETACHMENT 
(vs. Extraversion)Avoidance of socioemotional experi ence, including both withdrawal 
from interpersonal interactions (ranging from casual, daily interac-
tions to friendships to intimate relationships) and restricted affective 
experience and expression, partic ularly limited hedonic capacity.
Withdrawal Preference for bein g alone to being with others; reticence in social sit-
uations; avoidance of social contacts and activity; lack of initiation 
of social contact.
Intimacy avoidance Avoidance of close or ro mantic relationships, interpersonal attach-
ments, and intimate sexual relationships.
Anhedonia Lack of enjoyment from, engagement  in, or energy for life’s experiences; 
deficits in the capacity to feel pleasure and take interest in things.
Depressivity Feelings of being down, mise rable, and/or hopeless; difficulty recov-
ering from such moods; pessimism about the future; pervasive 
shame and/or guilt; feelings of inferior self-worth; thoughts of sui-
cide and suicidal behavior.
Restricted affectivity Little reaction to emot ionally arousing situations; constricted emo-
tional experience and expression; indifference and aloofness in nor-
matively engaging situations.
Suspiciousness Expectations of—and sensitivity to—signs of interpersonal ill-
intent or harm; doubts about loyalty and fidelity of others; feelings 
of being mistreated, used, and/or persecuted by others.
780 Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders
ANTAGONISM (vs. 
Agreeableness)Behaviors that put the individual at odds with other people, includ-
ing an exaggerated sense of self-importance and a concomitant 
expectation of special treatment, as well as a callous antipathy 
toward others, encompassing both an unawareness of others’ 
needs and feelings and a readiness to use others in the service of 
self-enhancement.
Manipulativeness Use of subterfuge to influence or control others; use of seduction, 
charm, glibness, or ingratia tion to achieve one’s ends.
Deceitfulness Dishonesty and fraudulence; misrepresentation of self; embellish-
ment or fabrication when relating events.
Grandiosity Believing that one is superior  to others and deserves special treat-
ment; self-centeredness; feelings  of entitlement;  condescension 
toward others.
Attention seeking Engaging in behavior designed to attract notice and to make oneself 
the focus of others’ attention and admiration.
Callousness Lack of concern for the feelings or problems of others; lack of guilt 
or remorse about the negative or harmful effects of one’s actions 
on others.
Hostility See Negative Affectivity.
DISINHIBITION 
(vs. Conscientiousness)Orientation toward immediate gratification, leading to impulsive 
behavior driven by current though ts, feelings, and external stim-
uli, without regard fo r past learning or consideration of future 
consequences.
Irresponsibility Disregard for—and failure  to honor—financial and other obliga-
tions or commitments; lack of respect for—and lack of follow-
through on—agreements and promises; carelessness with others’ 
property.
Impulsivity Acting on the spur of the moment in response to immediate stimuli; 
acting on a momentary basis with out a plan or consideration of 
outcomes; difficulty establishing and following plans; a sense of 
urgency and self-harming behavi or under emotional distress.
Distractibility Difficulty concentrating and focusing on tasks; attention is easily 
diverted by extraneous stimuli; difficulty maintaining goal-
focused behavior, including both planning and completing tasks.
Risk taking Engagement in dangerous,  risky, and potentially self-damaging 
activities, unnecessarily and withou t regard to consequences; lack 
of concern for one’s limitations and denial of the reality of per-
sonal danger; reckless pursuit of goals regardless of the level of 
risk involved.
Rigid perfectionism (lack of) Rigid insistence on everything being flawless, perfect, and without 
errors or faults, including one’s own and others’ performance; sac-
rificing of timeliness to ensure correctness in every detail; believ-
ing that there is only one right way to do things; difficulty 
changing ideas and/or viewpoint; preoccupation with details, 
organization, and order. The lack of  this facet characterizes low 
levels  of Disinhibition.TABLE 3 Definitions of DSM-5 personality disorder trait domains 
and facets (continued)
DOMAINS (Polar Opposites) 
and Facets Definitions
Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders 781
PSYCHOTICISM 
(vs. Lucidity)Exhibiting a wide range of cultura lly incongruent odd,  eccentric, or 
unusual behaviors and cognitions, including both process (e.g., 
perception, dissociation) and content (e.g., beliefs).
Unusual beliefs and 
experiencesBelief that one has unusual abilities, such as mind reading, telekine-
sis, thought-action fusion, unusual experiences of reality, includ-
ing hallucination-like experiences.
Eccentricity Odd, unusual, or bizarre behavior, appearance, and/or speech; 
having strange and unpredictable thoughts; saying unusual or 
inappropriate things.
Cognitive and perceptual 
dysregulationOdd or unusual thought processes and experiences, including 
depersonalization, derealization,  and dissociative experiences; 
mixed sleep-wake state experience s; thought-control experiences.TABLE 3 Definitions of DSM-5 personality disorder trait domains 
and facets (continued)
DOMAINS (Polar Opposites) 
and Facets Definitions
This page intentionally left blank 
783Conditions for
Further Study
Proposed criteria  sets are presented fo r conditions on which future research is en-
couraged. The specific items, thresholds, and durations contained in these research crite-
ria sets were set by expert co nsensus—informed by literature review, data reanalysis, and
field trial results, where available—and are intended to provide a common language for
researchers and clinicians who are interested in  studying these disord ers. It is hoped that
such research will allow the field to better  understand these conditions and will inform
decisions about possible placement in fort hcoming editions of DSM. The DSM-5 Task
Force and Work Groups subjecte d each of these proposed crit eria sets to a careful empir-
ical review and invited wide commentary from the field as well as from the general public.
The Task Force determined that there was in sufficient evidence to warrant inclusion of
these proposals as official mental disorder diagnoses in Section II. These proposed criteria
sets are not intended for clinical use; only th e criteria sets and disorders in Section II of
DSM-5 are officially recognized and can be used for clinical purposes.
Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome
Proposed Criteria  
A. At least one of the following symptoms is present in attenuated form, with relatively in-
tact reality testing, and is of sufficient seve rity or frequency to warr ant clinical attention:
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations. 
3. Disorganized speech.
B. Symptom(s) must have been present at least once per week for the past month.
C. Symptom(s) must have begun or worsened in the past year.
D. Symptom(s) is sufficiently distressing and disabling to the individual to warrant clinical
attention.
E. Symptom(s) is not better explained by another mental disorder, including a depressive
or bipolar disorder with psychotic features , and is not attributable to the physiological
effects of a substance or another medical condition.
F. Criteria for any psychotic disorder have never been met.
Diagnostic Features
Attenuated psychotic symptoms, as defined in Criterion A, are psychosis-like but below the
threshold for a full psychotic disorder. Comp ared with psychotic disorders, the symptoms
are less severe and more transient, and insight is relatively maintained . A diagnosis of atten-
uated psychosis syndrome requires state psychopathology associated with functional
impairment rather than long-standing trait pathology. The psychopathology has not pro-
gressed to full psychotic severi ty. Attenuated psychosis syndrome is a disorder based on the
manifest pathology and impaired function and distress. Changes in experiences and behav-
784 Conditions for Further Study
iors are noted by the individual  and/or others, suggesting a change in mental state (i.e., the
symptoms are of sufficient severi ty or frequency to warrant clin ical attention) (Criterion A).
Attenuated delusions (Criterion  A1) may have suspiciousness /persecutory ideational con-
tent, including persecutory ideas of reference. The individual may have a guarded, distrust-
ful attitude. When the delusions are moderate in severity, the individual views others as
untrustworthy and may be hyperv igilant or sense ill will in others. When the delusions are
severe but still within the attenuated range, the individual entertains  loosely organized be-
liefs about danger or hostile in tention, but the delusions do no t have the fixed nature that is
necessary for the diagnosis of a psychotic diso rder. Guarded behavior in the interview can
interfere with the ability to gath er information. Rea lity testing and perspective can be elic-
ited with nonconfirming evidence, but the prop ensity for viewing the world as hostile and
dangerous remains strong. Attenuated delusions may have grandiose content presenting as
an unrealistic sense of superior capacity. Wh en the delusions are moderate, the individual
harbors notions of being gifted, influential, or special. When the delusions are severe, the in-
dividual has beliefs of superiority that often alienate friends and worry relatives. Thoughts
of being special may lead to unrealistic plans and investments, yet skepticism about these at-
titudes can be elicited with persis tent questioning and confrontation.
Attenuated hallucinations (Criterion A2) include alterations in sensory perceptions,
usually auditory and/or visual. When the hallucinations are moderate, the sounds and
images are often unformed (e.g ., shadows, trails, halos, mu rmurs, rumbling), and they are
experienced as unusual or puzzling. When the hallucinations are severe, these experiences
become more vivid and frequent (i.e., recurring illusions or hallucinations that capture at-
tention and affect thinking and concentratio n). These perceptual abnormalities may dis-
rupt behavior, but skepticism about their reality can still be induced. 
Disorganized communica tion (Criterion A3) may manifest as odd speech (vague, meta-
phorical, overelaborate, stereoty ped), unfocused speech (confuse d, muddled, too fast or too
slow, wrong words, irrelevant context, off trac k), or meandering speech (circumstantial, tan-
gential). When the disorganization is moderately  severe, the individual frequently gets into
irrelevant topics but re sponds easily to clarifying questi ons. Speech may be odd but under-
standable. At the moderately severe level, speech becomes meandering and circumstantial,
and when the disorganization is severe, the in dividual fails to get to the point without
external guidance (tangential). At the severe level, some thought blocking and/or loose as-
sociations may occur infrequently, especially wh en the individual is under pressure, but re-
orienting questions quickly re turn structure and organiza tion to the conversation. 
The individual realizes that changes in mental state and/or in relationships are taking
place. He or she maintains reasonable insigh t into the psychotic-like experiences and gen-
erally appreciates that altered perceptions are not real and magical ideation is not compel-
ling. The individual must experience distress and/or impaired performance in social or role
functioning (Criterion D), and the individual or responsible others must note the changes
and express concern, such that clinic al care is sought (Criterion A).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The individual may experience magical thinking, perceptual aberrations, difficulty in con-
centration, some disorganization in thought or behavior, excessive suspiciousness, anxi-
ety, social withdrawal, and disruption in sl eep-wake cycle. Impaired cognitive function
and negative symptoms are often observed. Neuroimaging variables distinguish cohorts
with attenuated psychosis syndro me from normal control coho rts with patterns similar to,
but less severe than, that observed in schi zophrenia. However, neuroimaging data is not
diagnostic at the individual level.
Prevalence
The prevalence of attenuated psychosis syndrome is unknown. Symptoms in Criterion A
are not uncommon in the non-help-seeking population, ranging from 8%–13% for hallu-
Conditions for Further Study 785
cinatory experiences and delusional thinking. There appears to be a slight male prepon-
derance for attenuated psychosis syndrome.
Development and Course
Onset of attenuated psychosis syndrome is usually in mid-to-late adolescence or early
adulthood. It may be preceded by normal development or evidence for impaired cogni-
tion, negative symptoms, and/or impaired so cial development. In help-seeking cohorts,
approximately 18% in 1 year and 32% in 3 years may progress symptomatically and met
criteria for a psychotic disorder . In some cases, the syndrome may transition to a depres-
sive or bipolar disorder with psychotic featur es, but development to a schizophrenia spec-
trum disorder is more frequent. It appears that the diagnosis is  best applied to individuals
ages 15–35 years. Long-term course is not yet describe d beyond 7–12 years.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Factors predicting prognosis of attenuated psychosis syndrome have
not been definitively characterized, but the presence of negative symptoms, cognitive im-
pairment, and poor functionin g are associated with poor outcome and increase risk of
transition to psychosis.
Genetic and physiological. A family history of psychosis places the individual with at-
tenuated psychosis syndrome at  increased risk for developing a full psychotic disorder.
Structural, functional, and neurochemical  im aging data are associated with increased risk
of transition to psychosis.
Functional Consequences of 
Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome
Many individuals may experience functional impairments. Modest-to-moderate impair-
ment in social and role functioning may pers ist even with abatement of symptoms. A sub-
stantial portion of individuals with the diagnosis will improve over time; many continue
to have mild symptoms and impairment, and many others will have a full recovery.
Differential Diagnosis
Brief psychotic disorder. When symptoms of attenuated psychosis syndrome initially
manifest, they may resemble sy mptoms of brief psychotic di sorder. However, in attenu-
ated psychosis syndrome, the symptoms do no t cross the psychosis threshold and reality
testing/insight remains intact. 
Schizotypal personality disorder. Schizotypal personality disorder, although having
symptomatic features that are similar to thos e of attenuated psychosis syndrome, is a rel-
atively stable trait disorder not meeting the st ate-dependent aspects (Criterion C) of atten-
uated psychosis syndrome. In addition, a br oader array of symptoms is required for
schizotypal personality disorder, although in the early stages of pr esentation it may re-
semble attenuated psychosis syndrome.
Depressive or bipolar disorders. Reality distortions that are temporally limited to an
episode of a major depressive disorder or bipolar disorder and are descriptively more
characteristic of those disorders do not me et Criterion E for attenuated psychosis syn-
drome. For example, feelings of low self-esteem  or attributions of low regard from others
in the context of major depressive disorder  would not qualify fo r comorbid attenuated
psychosis syndrome.
Anxiety disorders. Reality distortions that are temporally limited to an episode of an
anxiety disorder and are descriptively more ch aracteristic of an anxiety disorder do not
786 Conditions for Further Study
meet Criterion E for attenuated psychosis sy ndrome. For example, a feeling of being the
focus of undesired attention in the context of social anxiety disorder  would not qualify for
comorbid attenuated psychosis syndrome.
Bipolar II disorder. Reality distortions that are temporal ly limited to an episode of ma-
nia or hypomania and are descriptively more ch aracteristic of bipolar disorder do not meet
Criterion E for attenuated psyc hosis syndrome. For example, inflated self-esteem in the
context of pressured speech and reduced need for sleep would not qua lify for comorbid at-
tenuated psychosis syndrome.
Borderline personality disorder. Reality distortions that ar e concomitant with border-
line personality disorder and are descriptively mo re characteristic of it do not meet Crite-
rion E for attenuated psychosis syndrome. For example, a sense of being unable to
experience feelings in the context of an inte nse fear of real or im agined abandonment and
recurrent self-mutilation  would not qualify fo r comorbid attenuated psychosis syndrome.
Adjustment reaction of adolescence. Mild, transient symptoms typical of normal de-
velopment and consistent with the degree of stress experienced do not qualify for attenu-
ated psychosis syndrome.
Extreme end of perceptual aberration and magical thinking in the non-ill population.
This diagnostic possibility should be strongly entertained when reality distortions are not
associated with distress and functional impairment and need for care.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. Substance use is common among
individuals whose symptoms meet attenuated  psychosis syndrome criteria. When other-
wise qualifying characteristic symptoms are strongly temporally related to substance use
episodes, Criterion E for attenuated psychosis syndrome may not be met, and a diagnosis
of substance/medication-induced ps ychotic disorder may be preferred.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. A history of attentional impairment does not
exclude a current attenuated psychosis syndro me diagnosis. Earlier attentional impair-
ment may be a prodromal condit ion or comorbid at tention-deficit/hype ractivity disorder.
Comorbidity
Individuals with attenuated psychosis syndrome often experience anxiety and/or depres-
sion. Some individuals with an attenuated psychosis syndrome diagnosis will progress to
another diagnosis, including anxi ety, depressive, bipolar, and personality disorders. In such
cases, the psychopathology asso ciated with the attenuated psychosis syndrome diagnosis is
reconceptualized as the prodromal phase of another disorder, not a comorbid condition.
Depressive Episodes With Short-Duration Hypomania
Proposed Criteria 
Lifetime experience of at least one majo r depressive episode meeting the following
criteria:
A. Five (or more) of the following criteria have been present during the same 2-week pe-
riod and represent a change from previous functioning; at least one of the symptoms
is either (1) depressed mood or (2) loss of interest or pleasure. ( Note:  Do not include
symptoms that are clearly attributable to a medical condition.)
1. Depressed mood most of the day, nearly every day, as indicated by either subjec-
tive report (e.g., feels sad, empty, or hopeless) or observation made by others (e.g.,
appears tearful). ( Note:  In children and adolescents, can be irritable mood.)
2. Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in al l, or almost all, activities most of the
day, nearly every day (as indicated by either subjective account or observation).
Conditions for Further Study 787
3. Significant weight loss when not dieting or weight gain (e.g., a change of more than
5% of body weight in a month), or dec rease or increase in appetite nearly every
day. ( Note:  In children, consider failure to make expected weight gain.)
4. Insomnia or hypersomnia nearly every day.
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation nearly every day (observable by others, not
merely subjective feelings of restlessness or being slowed down).
6. Fatigue or loss of energy nearly every day.
7. Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt (which may be delu-
sional) nearly every day (not merely self-reproach or guilt about being sick).
8. Diminished ability to think or concentrate, or indecisiveness, nearly every day (ei-
ther by subjective account or as observed by others).
9. Recurrent thoughts of death (not just fear of dying), recurrent suicidal ideation with-
out a specific plan, or a suicide attempt or a specific plan for committing suicide.
B. The symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or an-
other medical condition.
D. The disturbance is not better explained by schizoaffective disorder and is not superim-
posed on schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder , delusional disorder, or other spec-
ified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder.
At least two lifetime episodes of hypomanic periods that involve the required crite-
rion symptoms below but are of  insufficient duration (a t least 2 days but less than
4 consecutive days) to meet criteria fo r a hypomanic episode. The criterion symp-
toms are as follows:
A. A distinct period of abnormally and persistently elevated, expansive, or irritable mood
and abnormally and persistently increased goal-directed activity or energy.
B. During the period of mood disturbance and in creased energy and activity, three (or more)
of the following symptoms have persisted (four if the mood is only irritable), represent a no-
ticeable change from usual behavior, and have been present to a significant degree:
1. Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
2. Decreased need for sleep (e.g., feels rested after only 3 hours of sleep).
3. More talkative than usual or pressured to keep talking.
4. Flight of ideas or subjective experience that thoughts are racing.
5. Distractibility (i.e., attention too easily drawn to unimportant or irrelevant external
stimuli), as reported or observed.
6. Increase in goal-directed activity (either socially, at work or school, or sexually) or
psychomotor agitation.
7. Excessive involvement in activities that have a high potential for painful conse-
quences (e.g., the individual engages in unrestrained buying sprees, sexual indis-
cretions, or foolish business investments).
C. The episode is associated with an unequivocal change in functioning that is uncharac-
teristic of the individual when not symptomatic.
D. The disturbance in mood and the change in functioning are observable by others.
E. The episode is not severe enough to cause marked impairment in social or occupa-
tional functioning or to necessitate hospitalization. If there are psychotic features, the
episode is, by definition, manic.
F. The episode is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
of abuse, a medication or other treatment).
788 Conditions for Further Study
Diagnostic Features
Individuals with short-durati on hypomania have experienced at least one major depres-
sive episode as well as at least two episodes of 2–3 days’ duration  in which criteria for a hy-
pomanic episode were met (except for symptom duration). These episodes are of sufficient
intensity to be categorized as a hypomanic ep isode but do not meet the 4-day duration re-
quirement. Symptoms are present to a signific ant degree, such that they represent a no-
ticeable change from the individual’s normal behavior.
An individual with a history of a syndromal hypomanic episode and a major depres-
sive episode by definition has bipolar II disord er, regardless of current duration of hypo-
manic symptoms.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals who have experienced both shor t-duration hypomania and a major depres-
sive episode, with their increased comorbidit y with substance use disorders and a greater
family history of bipolar diso rder, more closely resemble in dividuals with bipolar disor-
der than those with major depressive disorder. 
Differences have also been found between individuals with short-duration hypomania
and those with syndromal bipolar disorder. Work impairment was greater for individuals
with syndromal bipolar disorder, as was the es timated average number of episodes. Indi-
viduals with short-duration hypomania may exhibit less se verity than individuals with
syndromal hypomanic episodes, including less mood lability.
Prevalence
The prevalence of short-duration hypomania is un clear, since the criteria are new as of this
edition of the manual. Using somewhat different  criteria, however, it has been estimated
that short-duration hypomania occurs in 2.8%  of the population (compared with hypoma-
nia or mania in 5.5% of the population). Short-duration hypomani a may be more common
in females, who may present with more  features of atypical depression. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. A family history of mania is two to three times more common in
individuals with short-duration hypomania co mpared with the general population, but less
than half as common as in individuals with  a history of syndromal mania or hypomania.
Suicide Risk
Individuals with short-duration hypomania ha ve higher rates of suicide attempts than
healthy individuals, although not as high as the rates in individuals with syndromal bipo-
lar disorder.
Functional Consequences of Short-Duration Hypomania
Functional impairments associated specifically  with short-duration hypomania are as yet
not fully determined. However, research suggests that individuals with this disorder have
less work impairment than individuals with  syndromal bipolar disorder but more comor-
bid substance use disorders, particularly alco hol use disorder, than individuals with major
depressive disorder. 
Differential Diagnosis
Bipolar II disorder. Bipolar II disorder is characterized by a period of at least 4 days of
hypomanic symptoms, whereas short-duration hypomania is characterized by periods of
Conditions for Further Study 789
2–3 days of hypomanic symptoms. Once an individual has experienced a hypomanic ep-
isode (4 days or more), the diagnosis beco mes and remains bipolar II disorder regardless
of future duration of hy pomanic symptom periods. 
Major depressive disorder. Major depressive disorder is al so characterized by at least
one lifetime major depressive ep isode. However, the additional presence of at least two life-
time periods of 2–3 days of hypomanic symptoms leads to a diagnosis of short-duration hy-
pomania rather than to major depressive disorder.  
Major depressive disorder with mixed features. Both major depressive disorder with
mixed features and short-duration hypomania are characterized by the presence of some
hypomanic symptoms and a major depressive episode. However, major depressive disor-
der with mixed features is characteri zed by hypomanic features present concurrently  with
a major depressive episode, while individual s with short-duration hypomania experience
subsyndromal hypomania and fully syndroma l major depression at different times.
Bipolar I disorder. Bipolar I disorder is differentiat ed from short-duration hypomania
by at least one lifetime manic episode, which is longer (at least 1 week) and more severe
(causes more impaired social functioning) than a hypomanic episode. An episode (of any
duration) that involves psychotic symptoms or necessitates hospitalization is by definition
a manic episode rather than a hypomanic one.
Cyclothymic disorder. While cyclothymic disorder is characterized by periods of de-
pressive symptoms and periods of hypomanic symptoms, the lifetime presence of a major
depressive episode precludes the di agnosis of cyclothymic disorder. 
Comorbidity
Short-duration hypomania, similar to full hypomanic episodes, has been associated with
higher rates of comorbid anxi ety disorders and substance use disorders than are found in
the general population.
Persistent Complex Bereavement Disorder
Proposed Criteria  
A. The individual experienced the death of someone with whom he or she had a close re-
lationship.
B. Since the death, at least one of the following symptoms is experienced on more days
than not and to a clinically significant degree and has persisted for at least 12 months
after the death in the case of bereaved adults and 6 months for bereaved children:
1. Persistent yearning/longing for the deceased. In young children, yearning may be
expressed in play and behavior, including behaviors that reflect being separated
from, and also reuniting with, a caregiver or other attachment figure.
2. Intense sorrow and emotional pain in response to the death.
3. Preoccupation with the deceased.
4. Preoccupation with the circumstances of the death. In children, this preoccupation
with the deceased may be expressed through the themes of play and behavior and
may extend to preoccupation with possible death of others close to them.
C. Since the death, at least six of the following symptoms are experienced on more days
than not and to a clinically significant degree, and have persisted for at least 12 months
after the death in the case of bereaved adults and 6 months for bereaved children:
790 Conditions for Further Study
Reactive distress to the death
1. Marked difficulty accepting the death. In children, this is dependent on the child’s
capacity to comprehend the meaning and permanence of death.
2. Experiencing disbelief or emotional numbness over the loss.
3. Difficulty with positive reminiscing about the deceased.
4. Bitterness or anger related to the loss.
5. Maladaptive appraisals about oneself in relation to the deceased or the death (e.g.,
self-blame).
6. Excessive avoidance of reminders of the loss (e.g., avoidance of individuals,
places, or situations associated with the deceased; in children, this may include
avoidance of thoughts and feelings regarding the deceased).
Social/identity disruption
7. A desire to die in order to be with the deceased.
8. Difficulty trusting other individuals since the death.
9. Feeling alone or detached from other individuals since the death.
10. Feeling that life is meaningless or empty without the deceased, or the belief that
one cannot function without the deceased.
11. Confusion about one’s role in life, or a diminished sense of one’s identity (e.g., feel-
ing that a part of oneself died with the deceased).
12. Difficulty or reluctance to pursue interests since the loss or to plan for the future
(e.g., friendships, activities).
D. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
E. The bereavement reaction is out of proportion to  or inconsistent with cultural, religious,
or age-appropriate norms.
Specify if: 
With traumatic bereavement:  Bereavement due to homicide or suicide with persis-
tent distressing preoccupations regarding the traumatic nature of the death (often in re-
sponse to loss reminders), including the deceased’s last moments, degree of suffering
and mutilating injury, or the malicious or intentional nature of the death.
Diagnostic Features 
Persistent complex bereavement disorder is diagnosed only if at least 12 months (6 months
in children) have elapsed since the death of someone with whom the bereaved had a close
relationship (Criterion A). This time fram e discriminates normal grief from persistent
grief. The condition typically involves a pe rsistent yearning/longing for the deceased
(Criterion B1), which may be associated with  intense sorrow and frequent crying (Crite-
rion B2) or preoccupation with  the deceased (Criterion B3).  The individual may also be
preoccupied with the manner in which the person died (Criterion B4). 
Six additional symptoms are required, includ ing marked difficulty accepting that the in-
dividual has died (Criterion C1) (e.g. preparing meals for them), disbelief that the individual is
dead (Criterion C2), distressing memories of the deceased (Criterion C3), anger over the loss
(Criterion C4), maladaptive appraisals about oneself in relation to the deceased or the death
(Criterion C5), and excessive avoidance of reminders of the loss  (Criterion C6). Individuals
may also report a desire to die because they wish to be with the deceased (Criterion C7); be dis-
trustful of others (Criterion C8);  feel isolated (Criterion C9); believe that life has no meaning or
purpose without the deceased (C riterion C10); experience a di minished sense of identity in
which they feel a part of themselves has died or been lost (Criterion C11); or have difficulty en-
gaging in activities, pursuing relationships, or planning for the future (Criterion C12). 
Conditions for Further Study 791
Persistent complex bereavement disorder requires clinically significant distress or im-
pairment in psychosocial functioning (Criteri on D). The nature and severity of grief must
be beyond expected norms for the relevant cu ltural setting, religio us group, or develop-
mental stage (Criterion E). Although there are variations in  how grief can manifest, the
symptoms of persistent complex bereavement disorder occur in both genders and in di-
verse social and cultural groups.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
Some individuals with persistent complex bereavement disorder experience hallucina-
tions of the deceased (auditory or visual) in which they temporarily perceive the deceased’s
presence (e.g., seeing the deceased sitting in his or her favorite chai r). They may also ex-
perience diverse somatic complaints (e.g., digestive complaints, pain, fatigue), including
symptoms experienced by the deceased. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of persistent complex bere avement disorder is approximately 2.4%–4.8%.
The disorder is more prevalent in females than in males.
Development and Course 
Persistent complex bereavement disorder can o ccur at any age, beginning after the age of
1 year. Symptoms usually begin within the initial months af ter the death, although there
may be a delay of months, or even years, before the full syndrome a ppears. Although grief
responses commonly appear immediately following bereavemen t, these reactions are not
diagnosed as persistent comp lex bereavement disorder unless the symptoms persist be-
yond 12 months (6 months for children). 
Young children may experience the loss of a primary caregiver as traumatic, given the
disorganizing effects the caregiver’s absence ca n have on a child’s coping response. In chil-
dren, the distress may be expressed in play and behavior, developmental regressions, and
anxious or protest behavior at times of separation and reunion. Separation distress may be
predominant in younger children, and social/i dentity distress and risk for comorbid de-
pression can increasingly manifest in older children and adolescents.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Risk for persistent complex bereavem ent disorder is heightened by in-
creased dependency on the deceased person pr ior to the death and by the death of a child.
Disturbances in caregiver support increase the risk for bereaved children. 
Genetic and physiological. Risk for the disorder is height ened by the bereaved individ-
ual being female.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
The symptoms of persistent complex bereav ement disorder are observed across cultural
settings, but grief responses may manifest in cu lturally specific ways. Diagnosis of the dis-
order requires that the persistent and severe responses go beyond cultural norms of grief
responses and not be better explained by culturally specific mourning rituals. 
Suicide Risk
Individuals with persistent complex bereavement disorder frequently report suicidal
ideation.
792 Conditions for Further Study
Functional Consequences of 
Persistent Complex Bereavement Disorder
Persistent complex bereavement di sorder is associated with deficits in work and social func-
tioning and with harmful health behaviors, such as increased tobacco and alcohol use. It is also
associated with marked increases in risks for serious medical conditions, including cardiac dis-
ease, hypertension, cancer, immunological deficiency, and reduced quality of life. 
Differential Diagnosis
Normal grief. Persistent complex bereavement diso rder is distinguished from normal
grief by the presence of severe grief reactions that persist at least 12 months (or 6 months in
children) after the death of the bereaved. It is only when severe levels of grief response per-
sist at least 12 months following the death an d interfere with the in dividual’s capacity to
function that persisten t complex bereavement disorder is diagnosed. 
Depressive disorders. Persistent complex bereavement disorder, major depressive dis-
order, and persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) share sadness, crying, and suicidal
thinking. Whereas major depressi ve disorder and persistent de pressive disorder can share
depressed mood with persistent complex bereavement disorder, the latter is characterized
by a focus on the loss. 
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Individuals who experience bereavement as a result of trau-
matic death may develop both posttraumatic stre ss disorder (PTSD) and persistent complex
bereavement disorder. Both conditions ca n involve intrusive th oughts and avoidance.
Whereas intrusions in PTSD revolve around the traumatic event, intrusive memories in per-
sistent complex bereavement diso rder focus on thoughts about many aspects of the relation-
ship with the deceased, including positive asp ects of the relationship and distress over the
separation. In individuals with the traumatic be reavement specifier of persistent complex be-
reavement disorder, the distressin g thoughts or feelings may be more overtly related to the
manner of death, with distressing fantasies of  what happened. Both persistent complex be-
reavement disorder and PTSD can involve avoi dance of reminders of distressing events.
Whereas avoidance in PTSD is characterized by  consistent avoidance of  internal and external
reminders of the traumatic experience, in persistent complex bereavement disorder, there is
also a preoccupation with the loss and yearning  for the deceased, which is absent in PTSD. 
Separation anxiety disorder. Separation anxiety disorder is characterized by anxiety
about separation from current attachment figures, whereas persistent complex bereavement
disorder involves distress about separation from a deceased individual. 
Comorbidity  
The most common comorbid disorders with pe rsistent complex bere avement disorder are
major depressive disorder, PT SD, and substance use disorders. PTSD is more frequently
comorbid with persistent complex bereavement disorder when the deat h occurred in trau-
matic or violent circumstances.
Caffeine Use Disorder
Proposed Criteria 
A problematic pattern of caffeine use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as
manifested by at least the first three of the following criteria occurring within a 12-month period: 
1. A persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control caffeine use.
2. Continued caffeine use despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physical
or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by caffeine.
Conditions for Further Study 793
3. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for caffeine. 
b. Caffeine (or a closely related) substance is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal
symptoms.
4. Caffeine is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended.
5. Recurrent caffeine use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work,
school, or home (e.g., repeated tardiness or absences from work or school related to
caffeine use or withdrawal).
6. Continued caffeine use despite having persist ent or recurrent social or interpersonal
problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of caffeine (e.g., arguments with
spouse about consequences of use, medical problems, cost).   
7. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: 
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of caffeine to achieve desired effect.
b. Markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of caffeine. 
8. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain caffeine, use caffeine, or
recover from its effects.
9. Craving or a strong desire or urge to use caffeine.
A diagnosis of substance dependence due to caffeine is recognized by the World Health
Organization in ICD-10. Since the publication of DSM-IV in 1994, considerable research on
caffeine dependence has been published, an d several recent reviews provide a current
analysis of this literature. There is now sufficie nt evidence to warran t inclusion of caffeine
use disorder as a research diagnosis in DSM-5 to encourage additional research. The work-
ing diagnostic algorithm propos ed for the study of caffeine use disorder differs from that
of the other substance use disorders, reflecting  the need to identify only cases that have
sufficient clinical importance to warrant the la beling of a mental disorder. A key goal of in-
cluding caffeine use disorder in  this section of DSM-5 is to stimulate research that will
determine the reliability, validity, and preval ence of caffeine use disorder based on the
proposed diagnostic schema, with particular attention to the association of the diagnosis
with functional impairments as part of validity testing. 
The proposed criteria for caff eine use disorder reflect the need for a diagnostic thresh-
old higher than that used for the other subs tance use disorders. Such a threshold is in-
tended to prevent overdiagnosis of caffeine us e disorder due to the high rate of habitual
nonproblematic daily caffeine use in the general population. 
Diagnostic Features
Caffeine use disorder is characterized by the continued use of caffeine and failure to con-
trol use despite negative physical and/or psyc hological consequences. In a survey of the
general population, 14% of caffeine users met the criterion of use despite harm, with most
reporting that a physician or counselor had advised them to stop or reduce caffeine use
within the last year. Medical and psychological problems attributed to caffeine included
heart, stomach, and urinary problems, and co mplaints of anxiety, depression, insomnia,
irritability, and difficulty thinking. In the sam e survey, 45% of caffei ne users reported de-
sire or unsuccessful efforts to control caffeine use, 18% repo rted withdrawal, 8% reported
tolerance, 28% used more than intended, and 50% reported spending a great deal of time
using caffeine. In addition, 19% reported a strong desire for caffeine that they could not re-
sist, and less than 1% reported that caffein e had interfered with social activities. 
Among those seeking treatment for quitting  problematic caffeine use, 88% reported
having made prior serious attempts to modify  caffeine use, and 43% reported having been
advised by a medical professional to reduce or eliminate caffeine. Ninety-three percent
endorsed signs and symptoms meeting DSM-IV criteria for caffeine dependence, with the
794 Conditions for Further Study
most commonly endorsed criteria being withdr awal (96%), persistent desire or unsuccess-
ful efforts to control use (89%), and use de spite knowledge of physical or psychological
problems caused by caffeine (87%). The most  common reasons for wanting to modify caf-
feine use were health-related (59%) and a desire to not be dependent on caffeine (35%).
The DSM-5 discussion of ca ffeine withdrawal in the Section II chapter “Substance-
Related and Addictive Disorders” provides info rmation on the features of the withdrawal
criterion. It is well documented  that habitual caffeine users can experience a well-defined
withdrawal syndrome upon ac ute abstinence from caffeine, and many caffeine-dependent
individuals report continued use of caffeine to avoid experiencing withdrawal symptoms. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of caffeine use di sorder in the general population is unclear. Based on all
seven generic DSM-IV-TR criteria for dependence, 30% of current caffeine users may have
met DSM-IV criteria for a diagnosis of caffei ne dependence, with endorsement of three or
more dependence criteria, during the past year . When only four of the seven criteria (the
three primary criteria proposed above plus to lerance) are used, the prevalence appears to
drop to 9%. Thus, the expected prevalence of caffeine use disorder among regular caffeine
users is likely less than 9%. Given that approximately 75%–80% of the general population
uses caffeine regularly, the estimated preval ence would be less than 7%. Among regular
caffeine drinkers at higher risk for caffeine use problems (e.g., high school and college stu-
dents, individuals in drug treatment, and indi viduals at pain clinics who have recent his-
tories of alcohol or illicit drug misuse), ap proximately 20% may have a pattern of use that
meets all three of the proposed criteria in Criterion A.
Development and Course
Individuals whose patter n of use meets criteria for a ca ffeine use disorder have shown a
wide range of daily caffeine intake and have been consumer s of various types of caffein-
ated products (e.g., coffee, soft drinks, tea)  and medications. A diagnosis of caffeine use
disorder has been shown to prospectively pred ict a greater incidence of caffeine reinforce-
ment and more severe withdrawal.
There has been no longitudinal or cross-sect ional lifespan research on caffeine use dis-
order. Caffeine use disorder has been identi fied in both adolescents and adults. Rates of
caffeine consumption and overa ll level of caffeine consumption tend to increase with age
until the early to mid-30s and then level off.  Age-related factors for caffeine use disorder
are unknown, although concern is growing related to excessive caffeine consumption
among adolescents and young adults through use of caffeinated energy drinks. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Genetic and physiological. Heritabilities of heavy caffeine use, caffeine tolerance, and
caffeine withdrawal range from  35% to 77%. For caffeine use, alcohol use, and cigarette
smoking, a common genetic factor (polysubst ance use) underlies the use of these three
substances, with 28%–41% of the heritable e ffects of caffeine use (or heavy use) shared
with alcohol and smoking. Caffeine and toba cco use disorders are associated and substan-
tially influenced by genetic factors unique to these licit drugs. The magnitude of heritabil-
ity for caffeine use disorder ma rkers appears to be similar to that for alcohol and tobacco
use disorder markers.
Functional Consequences of Caffeine Use Disorder
Caffeine use disorder may predict greater use of caffeine during pregnancy. Caffeine with-
drawal, a key feature of caffeine use disorder, has been shown to produce functional im-
Conditions for Further Study 795
pairment in normal daily activities. Caffeine intoxication may include symptoms of
nausea and vomiting, as well as impairment of normal activities. Significant disruptions in
normal daily activities may occur during caffeine abstinence. 
Differential Diagnosis
Nonproblematic use of caffeine. The distinction between nonproblematic use of caf-
feine and caffeine use disorder can be difficul t to make because social, behavioral, or psy-
chological problems may be difficult to attribut e to the substance, espe cially in the context of
use of other substances. Regular,  heavy caffeine use that can result in tolerance and with-
drawal is relatively common, which by itself sh ould not be sufficient for making a diagnosis. 
Other stimulant use disorder. Problems related to use of other stimulant medications
or substances may approximate the fe atures of caffeine use disorder.
Anxiety disorders. Chronic heavy caffeine use may mimi c generalized anxiety disorder,
and acute caffeine cons umption may produce and mimic panic attacks. 
Comorbidity
There may be comorbidity between caffeine use disorder and daily cigarette smoking, a
family or personal history of alcohol use diso rder. Features of caffeine use disorder (e.g.,
tolerance, caffeine withdrawal) may be positive ly associated with several diagnoses: ma-
jor depression, generali zed anxiety disorder, panic disorder, adult antisocial personality
disorder, and alcohol, cannab is, and cocaine use disorders.
Internet Gaming Disorder
Proposed Criteria
Persistent and recurrent use of the Internet to engage in games, often with other players,
leading to clinically significant impairment or distress as indicated by five (or more) of the
following in a 12-month period:
1. Preoccupation with Internet games. (The individual thinks about previous gaming
activity or anticipates playing the next game; Internet gaming becomes the dominant
activity in daily life).
Note:  This disorder is distinct from Internet gambling, which is included under gam-
bling disorder. 
2. Withdrawal symptoms when Internet gami ng is taken away. (These symptoms are typ-
ically described as irritability, anxiety, or sadness, but there are no physical signs of
pharmacological withdrawal.)
3. Tolerance—the need to spend increasing amounts of time engaged in Internet games.
4. Unsuccessful attempts to control the participation in Internet games.
5. Loss of interests in previous hobbies and entertainment as a result of, and with the ex-
ception of, Internet games. 
6. Continued excessive use of Internet games despite knowledge of psychosocial problems.
7. Has deceived family members, therapists, or others regarding the amount of Internet
gaming.
8. Use of Internet games to escape or relieve a negative mood (e.g., feelings of helpless-
ness, guilt, anxiety).
9. Has jeopardized or lost a significant relationship, job, or educational or career oppor-
tunity because of participation in Internet games.
796 Conditions for Further Study
Note:  Only nongambling Internet games are included in this disorder. Use of the Internet
for required activities in a business or profe ssion is not included; nor is the disorder intend-
ed to include other recreational or social Internet use. Similarly, sexual Internet sites are
excluded.
Specify current severity:
Internet gaming disorder can be mild, moderate, or severe depending on the degree
of disruption of normal activities. Individuals with less severe Internet gaming disorder
may exhibit fewer symptoms and less disruption of their lives. Those with severe Inter-
net gaming disorder will have more hours spent on the computer and more severe loss
of relationships or career or school opportunities. 
Subtypes 
There are no well-researched subtypes for Inte rnet gaming disorder to date. Internet gam-
ing disorder most often involves specific Inte rnet games, but it co uld involve non-Internet
computerized games as well, although these have  been less researched. It is likely that pre-
ferred games will vary over time as new games are developed and popularized, and it is
unclear if behaviors and consequence associat ed with Internet gaming disorder vary by
game type.
Diagnostic Features
Gambling disorder is currently the only non-substance-related disorder proposed for in-
clusion with DSM-5 substance-related and addi ctive disorders. However, there are other
behavioral disorders that show some similari ties to substance use disorders and gambling
disorder for which the word addiction is commonly used in nonmedical settings, and the
one condition with a considerab le literature is the compulsive playing of Internet games.
Internet gaming has been reportedly define d as an “addiction” by the Chinese govern-
ment, and a treatment system has been set up. Reports of treatment of this condition have
appeared in medical journals, mostly from A sian countries and some in the United States.
The DSM-5 work group reviewed more than 240 articles and found some behavioral
similarities of Internet gaming  to gambling disorder and to substance use disorders. The
literature suffers, howeve r, from lack of a standard defini tion from which to derive prev-
alence data. An understanding of the natural histories of cases, with or without treatment,
is also missing. The literature does describe many underlying similarities to substance ad-
dictions, including aspects of tolerance, withdr awal, repeated unsuccessful attempts to cut
back or quit, and impairment in normal func tioning. Further, the seemingly high preva-
lence rates, both in Asian countries and, to a lesser extent, in the West, justified inclusion of
this disorder in Section III of DSM-5.
Internet gaming disorder has significant public health importance, and additional re-
search may eventually lead to evidence that Internet gaming disorder (also commonly re-
ferred to as Internet use disorder,  Internet addiction,  or gaming addiction ) has merit as an
independent disorder. As with gambling disord er, there should be epidemiological stud-
ies to determine prevalence, c linical course, possible geneti c influence, and potential bio-
logical factors based on, for example, brain imaging data. 
Internet gaming disorder is a pattern of exce ssive and prolonged Inte rnet gaming that re-
sults in a cluster of cognitive and behavioral symptoms, including progressive loss of control
over gaming, tolerance, and withdrawal sy mptoms, analogous to the symptoms of sub-
stance use disorders. As with substance-related disorders, individuals with Internet gaming
disorder continue to sit at a computer and en gage in gaming activi ties despite neglect of
other activities. They typically de vote 8–10 hours or more per day to this activity and at least
30 hours per week. If they are prevented from  using a computer and returning to the game,
they become agitated and angry. They often go  for long periods without food or sleep. Nor-
Conditions for Further Study 797
mal obligations, such as  school or work, or family obligati ons are neglected. This condition is
separate from gambling disorder involving the Internet because mo ney is not at risk.
The essential feature of Internet gaming di sorder is persistent an d recurrent participa-
tion in computer gaming, ty pically group games, for many hours. These games involve
competition between groups of players (often in  different global regions, so that duration
of play is encouraged by the time-zone inde pendence) participating in complex structured
activities that include a significant aspect of social interactions during play. Team aspects
appear to be a key motivation. Attempts to di rect the individual toward schoolwork or in-
terpersonal activities are strongly resisted. Thus personal, family, or vocational pursuits
are neglected. When individuals are asked, the major reasons given for using the com-
puter are more likely to be “avoiding boredo m” rather than communicating or searching
for information.
The description of criteria rela ted to this condition is adapt ed from a study in China. Un-
til the optimal criteria and threshold for di agnosis are determined empirically, conserva-
tive definitions ought to be used, such that diagnoses are considered for endorsement of
five or more of nine criteria. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
No consistent personality types associated with  Internet gaming disorder have been iden-
tified. Some authors describe associated diagnoses, such as depressive disorders, atten-
tion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) , or obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
Individuals with compulsive Internet gaming have demonstrated brain activation in spe-
cific regions triggered by exposure to the Internet game but not limited to reward system
structures
Prevalence
The prevalence of Internet gaming disorder is unclear because of the varying question-
naires, criteria and thresholds employed, but it  seems to be highest in Asian countries and
in male adolescents 12–20 years of age. There is an abundance of reports from Asian coun-
tries, especially China and South Korea, bu t fewer from Europe and North America, from
which prevalence estimates are highly variable . The point prevalence in adolescents (ages
15–19 years) in one Asian study using a threshold of five criteria was 8.4% for males and
4.5% for females.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Computer availability with Internet connection allows access to the
types of games with which Internet gami ng disorder is most often associated.
Genetic and physiological. Adolescent males seem to be at greatest risk of developing
Internet gaming disorder, and it has been sp eculated that Asian environmental and/or ge-
netic background is another risk factor, but this remains unclear.
Functional Consequences of  Internet Gaming Disorder
Internet gaming disorder may lead to school failure, job loss, or marriage failure. The com-
pulsive gaming behavior tends to crowd out normal social, scholastic, and family activities.
Students may show declining grades and eventu ally failure in school. Family responsibil-
ities may be neglected. 
Differential Diagnosis
Excessive use of the Internet not involving playing of online games (e.g., excessive use of
social media, such as Facebook; viewing porn ography online) is not considered analogous
798 Conditions for Further Study
to Internet gaming disorder, and future rese arch on other excessive uses of the Internet
would need to follow similar guidelines as suggested herein. Excessive gambling online
may qualify for a separate diagnosis of gambling disorder.
Comorbidity
Health may be neglected due to compulsive ga ming. Other diagnoses that may be associ-
ated with Internet gaming disorder incl ude major depressive disorder, ADHD, and OCD.
Neurobehavioral Disorder Associated
With Prenatal Alcohol Exposure
Proposed Criteria
A. More than minimal exposure to alcohol during gestation, including prior to pregnancy
recognition. Confirmation of gestational exposure to alcohol may be obtained from ma-
ternal self-report of alcohol use in pregnancy, medical or other records, or clinical ob-
servation. 
B. Impaired neurocognitive functioning as manifested by one or more of the following:
1. Impairment in global intellectual performance (i.e., IQ of 70 or below, or a standard
score of 70 or below on a comprehensive developmental assessment).
2. Impairment in executive functioning (e.g., poor planning and organization; inflexi-
bility; difficulty with behavioral inhibition).
3. Impairment in learning (e.g., lower academic achievement than expected for intel-
lectual level; specific learning disability).
4. Memory impairment (e.g., problems remembering information learned recently;
repeatedly making the same mistakes; difficulty remembering lengthy verbal in-
structions).
5. Impairment in visual-spatial reasoning (e.g., disorganized or poorly planned draw-
ings or constructions; problems differentiating left from right).
C. Impaired self-regulation as manifested by one or more of the following:
1. Impairment in mood or behavioral regulation (e.g., mood lability; negative affect or
irritability; frequent behavioral outbursts).
2. Attention deficit (e.g., difficulty shifting attention; difficulty sustaining mental effort).
3. Impairment in impulse control (e.g., difficulty waiting turn; difficulty complying with
rules).
D. Impairment in adaptive functioning as manifested by two or more of the following, one
of which must be (1) or (2):
1. Communication deficit (e.g., delayed acquisition of language; difficulty understand-
ing spoken language).
2. Impairment in social communication and interaction (e.g., overly friendly with strang-
ers; difficulty reading social cues; difficulty understanding social consequences).
3. Impairment in daily living skills (e.g., delayed toileting, feeding, or bathing; difficulty
managing daily schedule).
4. Impairment in motor skills (e.g., poor fine motor development; delayed attainment
of gross motor milestones or ongoing deficits in gross motor function; deficits in co-
ordination and balance).
E. Onset of the disorder (symptoms in Criteria B, C, and D) occurs in childhood.
Conditions for Further Study 799
F. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, aca-
demic, occupational, or other im portant areas of functioning.
G. The disorder is not better explained by the direct physiological effects associated with
postnatal use of a substance (e.g., a medication, alcohol or other drugs), a general
medical condition (e.g., traumatic brain injury, delirium, dementia), another known te-
ratogen (e.g., fetal hydantoin syndrome), a genetic condition (e.g., Williams syndrome,
Down syndrome, Cornelia de Lange syndrome), or environmental neglect.
Alcohol is a neurobehavioral te ratogen, and prenatal alcoho l exposure has teratogenic
effects on central nervous system (CNS ) development and subsequent function. Neurobe-
havioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol exposure  (ND-PAE) is a new clarifying term,
intended to encompass the full range of de velopmental disabilities associated with expo-
sure to alcohol in utero. The current diagnost ic guidelines allow ND-PAE to be diagnosed
both in the absence and in the presence of th e physical effects of prenatal alcohol exposure
(e.g., facial dysmorphology required for a diagnosis of fetal alcohol syndrome).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of ND-PAE are the mani festation of impairment in neurocognitive,
behavioral, and adaptive functioning associated with prenatal alcohol exposure. Impair-
ment can be documented based on past diagnostic evaluation s (e.g., psychological or ed-
ucational assessments) or medical records, reports by the in dividual or informants, and/
or observation by a clinician.
A clinical diagnosis of fetal alcohol synd rome, including specific prenatal alcohol-
related facial dysmorphology and growth retardation, can be used as evidence of signifi-
cant levels of prenatal alcohol exposure. Although both animal and human studies have
documented adverse effects of lower levels of drinking, identifying how much prenatal
exposure is needed to sign ificantly impact neurodevelop mental outcome remains chal-
lenging. Data suggest that a history of more than minimal gestationa l exposure (e.g., more
than light drinking) prior to pregnancy reco gnition and/or following pregnancy recogni-
tion may be required. Light drinking is defined as 1–13 drinks per month during preg-
nancy with no more than 2 of these drinks co nsumed on any 1 drinking occasion. Identifying
a minimal threshold of drinking during preg nancy will require consideration of a variety
of factors known to affect exposure and/or interact to influence developmental outcomes,
including stage of prenatal development, gestational smoking, maternal and fetal genet-
ics, and maternal physical status (i.e., ag e, health, and certain obstetric problems). 
Symptoms of ND-PAE include marked impairment in global  intellectual performance
(IQ) or neurocognitive impair ments in any of the following areas: executive functioning,
learning, memory, and/or visual-spatial reasoning. Impairments in self-regulation are pres-
ent and may include impairment in mood or behavioral regulation, attention deficit, or
impairment in impulse control. Finally, impa irments in adaptive functioning include com-
munication deficits and impairment in soci al communication and interaction. Impairment
in daily living (self-help) skills and impairment in motor skills may be present.  As it may be
difficult to obtain an accurate assessment of the neurocogni tive abilities of very young chil-
dren, it is appropriate to defer a diagnosi s for children 3 years of age and younger.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Associated features vary depending on age,  degree of alcohol exposure, and the individ-
ual’s environment. An individual can be diag nosed with this disorder regardless of socio-
economic or cultural background. However, ongoing parental alcohol/substance misuse,
parental mental illness, exposure to domest ic or community violen ce, neglect or abuse,
disrupted caregiving relationships, multiple out-of-home placements, and lack of conti-
nuity in medical or mental health care are often present. 
800 Conditions for Further Study
Prevalence
The prevalence rates of ND-PAE are unknown. However, estimated prevalence rates of clini-
cal conditions associated with prenatal alco hol exposure are 2%–5% in the United States. 
Development and Course
Among individuals with prenatal alcohol exposure, evidence of CNS dysfunction varies
according to developmental stage. Although about one-half of young children prenatally
exposed to alcohol show marked  developmental delay in the first 3 years of life, other chil-
dren affected by prenatal alcohol exposure may not exhibit signs of CNS dysfunction until
they are preschool- or school-age. Additionally, impairments in higher order cognitive
processes (i.e., executive functioning), which are often associated with  prenatal alcohol ex-
posure, may be more easily assessed in older children. When children reach school age,
learning difficulties, impairme nt in executive function, and problems with integrative lan-
guage functions usually emerge more clearly, and both social skills deficits and challeng-
ing behavior may become more evident. In particular, as school and other requirements
become more complex, greater deficits are no ted. Because of this, the school years repre-
sent the ages at which a diagnosis of ND-PAE would be most likely. 
Suicide Risk
Suicide is a high-risk outcome, with rates incr easing significantly in late adolescence and
early adulthood.
Functional Consequences of Neurobehavioral Disorder 
Associated With Prenatal Alcohol Exposure
The CNS dysfunction seen in individuals with ND-PAE often leads to decrements in adap-
tive behavior and to maladaptive behavior  with lifelong consequences. Individuals
affected by prenatal alcohol ex posure have a higher prevalence of disrupted school expe-
riences, poor employme nt records, trouble with the law,  confinement (legal or psychiat-
ric), and dependent living conditions. 
Differential Diagnosis
Disorders that are attributable to the physiolo gical effects associated with postnatal use
of a substance, another medical condition, or environmental neglect. Other consid-
erations include the physiological effects of po stnatal substance use, such as a medication,
alcohol, or other substances; disorders due to another medical condition, such as traumatic
brain injury or other neurocognitive disorder s (e.g., delirium, majo r neurocognitive dis-
order [dementia]); or environmental neglect.
Genetic and teratogenic conditions. Genetic conditions such as Williams syndrome,
Down syndrome, or Cornelia de Lange syndro me and other teratogeni c conditions such as
fetal hydantoin syndrome and maternal phen ylketonuria may have similar physical and
behavioral characteristics. A careful review of prenatal exposure history is needed to clar-
ify the teratogenic agent, and an evaluation by  a clinical geneticist may be needed to dis-
tinguish physical characteristics associated with these and other genetic conditions. 
Comorbidity
Mental health problems have been identified in more than 90% of individuals with histo-
ries of significant prenatal alcohol exposu re. The most common co-occurring diagnosis is
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, bu t research has shown that individuals with
ND-PAE differ in neuropsychological charac teristics and in their responsiveness to phar-
Conditions for Further Study 801
macological interventions. Ot her high- probability co-occurring disorders include oppo-
sitional defiant disorder and co nduct disorder, but the appropriateness of these diagnoses
should be weighed in the context of the sign ificant impairments in general intellectual and
executive functioning that are often associa ted with prenatal al cohol exposure. Mood
symptoms, including symptoms of bipolar diso rder and depressive disorders, have been
described. History of prenatal alcohol exposure  is associated with an increased risk for
later tobacco, alcohol, and other substance use disorders. 
Suicidal Behavior Disorder
Proposed Criteria 
A. Within the last 24 months, the individual has made a suicide attempt.
Note:  A suicide attempt is a self-initiated sequence of behaviors by an individual who,
at the time of initiation, expected that the set of actions would lead to his or her own
death. The “time of initiation” is the time when a behavior took place that involved ap-
plying the method.)
B. The act does not meet criteria for nonsuicidal self-injury—that is, it does not involve
self-injury directed to the surface of the body undertaken to induce relief from a nega-
tive feeling/cognitive state or to achieve a positive mood state.
C. The diagnosis is not applied to suic idal ideation or to preparatory acts. 
D. The act was not initiated during a state of delirium or confusion. 
E. The act was not undertaken solely for a political or religious objective. 
Specify if:
Current: Not more than 12 months since the last attempt.
In early remission:  12–24 months since the last attempt.
Specifiers
Suicidal behavior is often categorized in term s of violence of the method. Generally, over-
doses with legal or illegal substances are cons idered nonviolent in method, whereas jump-
ing, gunshot wounds, and other methods are considered violent. Another dimension for
classification is medical consequences of the behavior, with high-lethality attempts being
defined as those requiring medical hospitalizat ion beyond a visit to an emergency depart-
ment. An additional dimension considered incl udes the degree of planning versus impul-
siveness of the attempt, a characteristic th at might have consequences for the medical
outcome of a suicide attempt.
If the suicidal behavior occurred 12–24 mo nths prior to evaluation, the condition is
considered to be in early remission. Individua ls remain at higher risk  for further suicide at-
tempts and death in the 24 months after a suicide attempt, and the period 12–24 months af-
ter the behavior took place is specified as “early remission.”
Diagnostic Features
The essential manifestation of suicidal be havior disorder is a suicide attempt. A suicide at-
tempt  is a behavior that the individual has undertak en with at least some intent to die. The
behavior might or might not le ad to injury or serious medi cal consequences. Several fac-
tors can influence the medical consequences of the suicide a ttempt, including poor plan-
ning, lack of knowledge about the lethality of the method chosen, low intentionality or
ambivalence, or chance intervention by others  after the behavior has been initiated. These
should not be considered in assigning the diagnosis.
802 Conditions for Further Study
Determining the degree of intent can be challenging. Individuals might not acknowl-
edge intent, especially in situations where doin g so could result in hospitalization or cause
distress to loved ones. Markers of risk includ e degree of planning, including selection of a
time and place to minimize rescue or interrupt ion; the individual’s mental state at the time
of the behavior, with acute agitation being especially concerning; recent discharge from
inpatient care; or recent discon tinuation of a mood stabilizer such as lithium or an anti-
psychotic such as clozapine in the case of schizophrenia. Examples of environmental “trig-
gers” include recently learning of a potentia lly fatal medical diagnosis such as cancer,
experiencing the sudden and unexpected loss of a close relative or partner, loss of employ-
ment, or displacement from h ousing. Conversely, features su ch as talking to others about
future events or preparedness to sign a contract for safety are less reliable indicators.
In order for the criteria to be met, the indivi dual must have made at least one suicide at-
tempt. Suicide attempts can incl ude behaviors in which, after initiating the suicide attempt,
the individual changed his or her mind or so meone intervened. For example, an individual
might intend to ingest a given amount of medication or pois on, but either stop or be stopped
by another before ingesting the full amount. If the individual is dissuaded by another or
changes his or her mind before initiating th e behavior, the diagnosis should not be made.
The act must not meet criteria for nonsuicidal self-i njury—that is, it should not involve re-
peated (at least five times within the past 12 months) self-injurious episodes undertaken to
induce relief from a negative feeling/cognitive state or to achieve a positive mood state. The
act should not have been initiated during a st ate of delirium or confusion. If the individual
deliberately became intoxicated before initiating  the behavior, to reduce anticipatory anxi-
ety and to minimize interference with the inte nded behavior, the diagnosis should be made.
Development and Course
Suicidal behavior can occur at any time in the lifespan but is rarely seen in children under
the age of 5. In prepubertal children, the behavi or will often consist of a behavior (e.g., sit-
ting on a ledge) that a parent has forbidden because of the risk of accident. Approximately
25%–30% of persons who attempt suicide will go on to make more attempts.There is sig-
nificant variability in terms of frequency, me thod, and lethality of attempts. However, this
is not different from what is observed in other illnesses, such as major depressive disorder,
in which frequency of episode,  subtype of episode, and impa irment for a given episode can
vary significantly.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Suicidal behavior varies in frequency and form  across cultures. Cultural differences might
be due to method availability (e.g., poisonin g with pesticides in developing countries;
gunshot wounds in the southwestern United St ates) or the presence of culturally specific
syndromes (e.g., ataques de nervios,  which in some Latino group s might lead to behaviors
that closely resemble suic ide attempts or might facilitate suicide attempts). 
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory abnormalities consequent to the suicidal attempt are of ten evident. Suicidal
behavior that leads to blood loss can be a ccompanied by anemia, hypotension, or shock.
Overdoses might lead to coma or obtundatio n and associated laboratory abnormalities
such as electrolyte imbalances.
Functional Consequences of Suicidal Behavior Disorder
Medical conditions (e.g., lacerations or skel etal trauma, cardiopulm onary instability, in-
halation of vomit and suffocation, hepatic fa ilure consequent to use of paracetamol) can
occur as a consequence of suicidal behavior.
Conditions for Further Study 803
Comorbidity
Suicidal behavior is seen in th e context of a variety of mental disorders, most commonly bipo-
lar disorder, major depressive disorder, schizo phrenia, schizoaffective disorder, anxiety dis-
orders (in particular, panic disorders asso ciated with catastrophic content and PTSD
flashbacks), substance use disorders (especially  alcohol use disorders) , borderline personality
disorder, antisocial personality disorder, eating disorders, and adjustment disorders. It is
rarely manifested by individual s with no discernible pathology,  unless it is undertaken be-
cause of a painful medical condition with the in tention of drawing attention to martyrdom for
political or religious reasons, or in partners in  a suicide pact, both of which are excluded from
this diagnosis, or when third-party informants  wish to conceal the nature of the behavior. 
Nonsuicidal Self-Injury
Proposed Criteria
A. In the last year, the individual has, on 5 or more days, engaged in intentional self-inflicted
damage to the surface of his or her body of a sort likely to induce bleeding, bruising, or pain
(e.g., cutting, burning, stabbing, hitting, excessive rubbing), with the expectation that the
injury will lead to only minor or moderate physi cal harm (i.e., there is no suicidal intent). 
Note:  The absence of suicidal intent has either been stated by the individual or can be
inferred by the individual’s repeated engagement in a behavior that the individual
knows, or has learned, is not likely to result in death.
B. The individual engages in the self-injurious behavior with one or more of the following
expectations:
1. To obtain relief from a negative feeling or cognitive state.
2. To resolve an interpersonal difficulty.
3. To induce a positive feeling state.
Note:  The desired relief or response is experienced during or shortly after the self-
injury, and the individual may display patterns of behavior suggesting a dependence
on repeatedly engaging in it.
C. The intentional self-injury is associated with at least one of the following:
1. Interpersonal difficulties or negative feelings or thoughts, such as depression, anx-
iety, tension, anger, generalized distress, or self-criticism, occurring in the period
immediately prior to the self-injurious act.
2. Prior to engaging in the act, a period of preoccupation with the intended behavior
that is difficult to control.
3. Thinking about self-injury that occurs frequently, even when it is not acted upon.
D. The behavior is not socially sanctioned (e.g., body piercing, tattooing, part of a religious
or cultural ritual) and is not restricted to picking a scab or nail biting.
E. The behavior or its consequences cause clinically significant distress or interference in
interpersonal, academic, or other important areas of functioning.
F. The behavior does not occur exclusively during psychotic episodes, delirium, sub-
stance intoxication, or substance withdrawal. In individuals with a neurodevelopmental
disorder, the behavior is not part of a pattern of repetitive stereotypies. The behavior
is not better explained by another mental disorder or medical condition (e.g., psychotic
disorder, autism spectrum disorder, intellectual disability, Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, ste-
reotypic movement disorder with self-injur y, trichotillomania [hair-pulling disorder], ex-
coriation [skin-picking] disorder).
804 Conditions for Further Study
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of nonsuicidal self-injur y is that the individual repeatedly inflicts
shallow, yet painful injuries to the surface of  his or her body. Most commonly, the purpose
is to reduce negative emotions, such as tensio n, anxiety, and self-reproach, and/or to re-
solve an interpersonal difficulty. In some cases, the injury is conceived of as a deserved
self-punishment. The individual will often report  an immediate sensation of relief that oc-
curs during the process. When the behavior o ccurs frequently, it mi ght be associated with
a sense of urgency and craving, the resultant behavioral pattern resembling an addiction.
The inflicted wounds can become deeper and more numerous. 
The injury is most often inflicted with a knif e, needle, razor, or other sharp object. Com-
mon areas for injury include the frontal area of the thighs and the dorsal side of the forearm.
A single session of injury might involve a se ries of superficial, parallel cuts—separated by
1 or 2 centimeters—on a visible or accessible location. The resulting cuts will often bleed and
will eventually leave a characteristic pattern of scars.
Other methods used include stabbing an area , most often the upper arm, with a needle
or sharp, pointed knife; inflicti ng a superficial burn with a lit cigarette end; or burning the
skin by repeated rubbing with an eraser. En gagement in nonsuicidal self-injury with mul-
tiple methods is associated with more severe  psychopathology, including engagement in
suicide attempts. 
The great majority of individuals who engage in nonsuicidal self-injury do not seek
clinical attention. It is not known if this re flects frequency of engagement in the disorder,
because accurate reporting is seen as stigma tizing, or because the behaviors are experi-
enced positively by the individual who engages in them, who is unmotivated to receive
treatment. Young children might experiment wi th these behaviors but not experience re-
lief. In such cases, youths often report that  the procedure is painful or distressing and
might then discontinue the practice.
Development and Course
Nonsuicidal self-injury most often starts in the early teen years and can continue for many
years. Admission to hospital for nonsuicida l self-injury reaches a peak at 20–29 years of
age and then declines. However, research that  has examined age at hospitalization did not
provide information on age at onset of the behavior, and prospective research is needed to
outline the natural history of nonsuicidal self-injury and the factors that promote or in-
hibit its course. Individuals often learn of th e behavior on the recommendation or observa-
tion of another. Research has shown that wh en an individual who engages in nonsuicidal
self-injury is admitted to an inpatient unit, other individuals may begin to engage in the
behavior.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Male and female prevalence rates of nonsuicida l self-injury are closer to each other than in
suicidal behavior disorder, in which the female-to-male ratio is about 3:1 or 4:1.
Two theories of psychopathology—based on functional behavioral analyses—have been
proposed: In the first, based on learning theo ry, either positive or negative reinforcement
sustains the behavior. Positive reinforcement might result fr om punishing oneself in a way
that the individual feels is de served, with the behavior induci ng a pleasant and relaxed state
or generating attention and help from a signific ant other, or as an expression of anger. Neg-
ative reinforcement results from affect regula tion and the reduction of unpleasant emotions
or avoiding distressing thoughts, including th inking about suicide. In the second theory,
nonsuicidal self-injury is thought to be a form of self-punishment, in which self-punitive ac-
tions are engaged in to make up for acts that caused distress or harm to others.
Conditions for Further Study 805
Functional Consequences of  Nonsuicidal Self-Injury
The act of cutting might be performed with shared implements, raising the possibility of
blood-borne disease transmission.
Differential Diagnosis
Borderline personality disorder. As indicated, nonsuicidal se lf-injury has long been re-
garded as a “symptom” of borderline pers onality disorder, even though comprehensive
clinical evaluations have found that most individuals with nonsuicidal self-injury have
symptoms that also meet criteria for other di agnoses, with eating disorders and substance
use disorders being especially common. Histor ically, nonsuicidal self-injury was regarded
as pathognomonic of borderline personality d isorder. Both conditions are associated with
several other diagnoses. Although frequently  associated, borderline personality disorder
is not invariably found in individuals with no nsuicidal self-injury. The two conditions dif-
fer in several ways. Individuals with borderline personality disorder often manifest dis-
turbed aggressive and hostile behaviors, whereas nonsuicidal self-injury is more often
associated with phases of closeness, collaborati ve behaviors, and positive relationships. At
a more fundamental level, there are difference s in the involvement of different neurotrans-
mitter systems, but these will not be apparent on clinical examination. 
Suicidal behavior disorder. The differentiation between nonsuicidal self-injury and sui-
cidal behavior disorder is base d either on the stated goal of  the behavior being a wish to
die (suicidal behavior disorder) or, in nonsuicidal self-injury, to experience relief as de-
scribed in the criteria. Depending on the ci rcumstances, individuals may provide reports
of convenience, and several studies report high  rates of false intent declaration. Individu-
als with a history of frequent nonsuicidal se lf-injury episodes have learned that a session
of cutting, while painful, is, in the short-term, largely benign. Be cause individuals with
nonsuicidal self-injury can and do attempt and commit suicide,  it is important to check
past history of suicidal behavior and to ob tain information from a third party concerning
any recent change in stress exposure and mo od. Likelihood of suicide intent has been as-
sociated with the use of multiple  previous methods of self-harm. 
In a follow-up study of cases of “self-harm” in males treated at one of several multiple
emergency centers in the United Kingdom, in dividuals with nonsuicidal self-injury were
significantly more likely to commit suicide th an other teenage individuals drawn from the
same cohort. Studies that have examined the relationship be tween nonsuicidal self-injury
and suicidal behavior disorder  are limited by being retrospe ctive and failing to obtain ver-
ified accounts of the method used during pr evious “attempts.” A significant proportion of
those who engage in nonsuicidal self-injury have responded positively when asked if they
have ever engaged in self-cutti ng (or their preferred means of self-injury) with an intention
to die. It is reasonable to co nclude that nonsuicidal self-injury, while not presenting a high
risk for suicide when first manifested, is an  especially dangerous form of self-injurious
behavior.
This conclusion is also supported by a mult isite study of depressed adolescents who had
previously failed to respond to  antidepressant medi cation, which noted th at those with pre-
vious nonsuicidal self-inj ury did not respond to cognitive-behavioral therapy,  and by a study
that found that nonsuicida l self-injury is a predicto r of substance use/misuse. 
Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder). Trichotillomania is an injurious behavior con-
fined to pulling out one’s own hair, most commonly from the sc alp, eyebrows, or eyelashes.
The behavior occurs in “sessions” that can last fo r hours. It is most likely to occur during a
period of relaxation or distraction. 
806 Conditions for Further Study
Stereotypic self-injury. Stereotypic self-injury, which can include head banging, self-
biting, or self-hitting, is usually associated with intense concentration or under conditions
of low external stimulation and might be associated with developmental delay.
Excoriation (skin-picking) disorder. Excoriation disorder occurs mainly in females and
is usually directed to picking at an area of th e skin that the individual feels is unsightly or
a blemish, usually on the face or the scalp. As in nonsuicidal self-injury, the picking is often
preceded by an urge and is experienced as pleasurable, even thoug h the individual real-
izes that he or she is harming himself or hersel f. It is not associated with the use of any im-
plement.
APPENDIX
Highlights of Changes From DSM-IV to DSM-5  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .809
Glossary of Technical Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .817
Glossary of Cultural Concepts of Distress  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .833
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes 
(ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .839
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM) . . . . . .863
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM) . . . . .877
DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .897
This page intentionally left blank 
809Highlights of Changes From
DSM-IV to DSM-5
Changes made to DSM-5  diagnostic criteria and text s are outlined in this chapter
in the same order in which they appear in the DSM-5 classification. This abbreviated descrip-
tion is intended to orient readers to only the most significant changes in each disorder cate-
gory. An expanded description of nearly all changes (e.g., except minor text or wording
changes needed for clarity) is available online (www.psychiatry.org/ds m5). It should also be
noted that Section I contains a description of changes pertaining to the chapter organization
in DSM-5, the multiaxial sy stem, and the introduction of dimensional assessments.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders
The term mental retardation  was used in DSM-IV. However, intellectual disability (intel-
lectual developmental disorder)  is the term that has come into common use over the past
two decades among medical, ed ucational, and other professi onals, and by the lay public
and advocacy groups. Diagnostic criteria em phasize the need for an assessment of both
cognitive capacity (IQ) and adaptive functionin g. Severity is determined by adaptive func-
tioning rather than IQ score.
The communication disorders,  which are newly named from DSM-IV phonological dis-
order and stuttering, respectively, include language disorder  (which combines the previous
expressive and mixed receptive-ex pressive language disorders), speech sound disorder  (pre-
viously phonological disorder), and childhood-onset fluency disorder  (previously stutter-
ing). Also included is social (pragmatic) communication disorder,  a new condition involving
persistent difficulties in the social us es of verbal and nonverbal communication.
Autism spectrum disorder  is a new DSM-5 disorder encompassing the previous DSM-
IV autistic disorder (autism), Asperger’s disorder, childhood disi ntegrative disorder,
Rett’s disorder, and pervasive developmental di sorder not otherwise specified. It is char-
acterized by deficits in two core domains: 1) deficits in social communication and social in-
teraction and 2) restricted repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, and activities.
Several changes have been made to the diagnostic criteria for attention-deficit/hyperactiv-
ity disorder  (ADHD). Examples have been added to the criterion items to facilitate application
across the life span; the age at onset descri ption has been changed (from “some hyperactive-
impulsive or inattentive symptoms that caused impairment were present before age 7 years”
to “Several inattentive or hy peractive-impulsive symptoms we re present prior to age 12”);
subtypes have been replaced with presentation specifiers that map directly to the prior sub-
types; a comorbid diagnosis with autism spec trum disorder is now allowed; and a symptom
threshold change has been made for adults, to reflect the substantial evidence of clinically sig-
nificant ADHD impairment, with the cutoff for ADHD of five symptoms, instead of six re-
quired for younger persons, both for inatte ntion and for hyperactivity and impulsivity.
Specific learning disorder  combines the DSM-IV diagnose s of reading disorder, math-
ematics disorder, disorder of  written expression, and lear ning disorder not otherwise
specified. Learning deficits in the areas of  reading, written expr ession, and mathematics
are coded as separate specifiers. Acknowledgment  is made in the text that specific types of
reading deficits are described internationally in various ways as dyslexia  and specific types
of mathematics deficits as dyscalculia.
810 Highlights of Changes From DSM-IV to DSM-5
The following motor disorders  are included in DSM-5: deve lopmental coordination disor-
der, stereotypic movement disorder, Tourette’s disorder, persistent (chronic) motor or vocal
tic disorder, provisional tic disorder, other spec ified tic disorder, and un specified tic disorder.
The tic criteria have been standardized across all of these disorders in this chapter.
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Two changes were made to Criterion A for schizophrenia:  1) the elimination of the special at-
tribution of bizarre delusions and Schneiderian fi rst-rank auditory hallucinations (e.g., two or
more voices conversing), leadin g to the requirement of at least two Criterion A symptoms for
any diagnosis of schizophrenia, and 2) the addition  of the requirement that at least one of the
Criterion A symptoms must be delusions, hallu cinations, or disorganized speech. The DSM-IV
subtypes of schizophrenia were eliminated due to their limited diagnostic stability, low reli-
ability, and poor validity. Instead, a dimensional approach to rating severity for the core symp-
toms of schizophrenia is includ ed in DSM-5 Section III to capt ure the important heterogeneity
in symptom type and severity  expressed across individual s with psychotic disorders.
Schizoaffective disorder  is reconceptualized as a longitudin al instead of a cross-sectional di-
agnosis—more comparable to schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and majo r depressive disorder,
which are bridged by this condition—and requires  that a major mood episode be present for a
majority of the total disorder ’s duration after Criterion A has been met. Criterion A for delu-
sional disorder no longer has the requirement that th e delusions must be nonbizarre; a spec-
ifier is now included for bizarre type delusions to provide continuity with DSM-IV. Criteria for
catatonia are described uniformly across DSM-5. Fu rthermore, catatonia may be diagnosed
with a specifier (for depressive, bipolar, and psychotic disorders, incl uding schizophrenia), in
the context of a known medical condition,  or as an other specified diagnosis.
Bipolar and Related Disorders
Diagnostic criteria for bipolar disorders  now include both changes in mood and changes in
activity or energy. The DSM-IV diagnosis of bipolar I disorder, mixed episodes—requiring
that the individual simultaneous ly meet full criteria for both mania and major depressive ep-
isode—is replaced with a new specifier “with mixed features.” Particular conditions can
now be diagnosed under other specified bipolar and related disorder, including categori-
zation for individuals with a past history of  a major depressive di sorder whose symptoms
meet all criteria for hypomania except the duration criterion is  not met (i.e., the episode lasts
only 2 or 3 days instead of the required 4 cons ecutive days or more). A second condition con-
stituting an other specified bipolar and related disorder variant is that too few symptoms of
hypomania are present to meet criteria for the full bipolar II syndrome, although the dura-
tion, at least 4 consecutive days, is sufficient. Finally, in both this chapter and in the chapter
“Depressive Disorders,” an anxious distress specifier is delineated.
Depressive Disorders
To address concerns about potential overdiagno sis and overtreatment of bipolar disorder in
children, a new diagnosis, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder,  is included for children
up to age 18 years who exhibit persistent irrita bility and frequent episodes of extreme behav-
ioral dyscontrol. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder  is now promoted from Appendix B, “Cri-
teria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study, ” in DSM-IV to the main body of DSM-5. What
was referred to as dysthymia in DSM-IV now falls under the category of persistent depressive
disorder,  which includes both chronic major depre ssive disorder and the previous dysthymic
disorder. The coexistence within a major depressive episode  of at least three manic symp-
toms (insufficient to satisfy cr iteria for a manic episode) is no w acknowledged by the specifier
Highlights of Changes From DSM-IV to DSM-5 811
“with mixed features.” In DSM-IV, there was an exclusion criterion for a major depressive ep-
isode that was applied to depressive symptoms lasting less than 2 months following the death
of a loved one (i.e., the bereavement exclusion). This exclusion is omitted in DSM-5 for several
reasons, including the recognitio n that bereavement is a severe psychosocial stressor that can
precipitate a major depressive episode in a vu lnerable individual, generally beginning soon
after the loss, and can add an additional risk for suffering, feelings of worthlessness, suicidal
ideation, poorer medical health, and worse interp ersonal and work functioning. It was critical
to remove the implication that bereavement ty pically lasts only 2 months, when both physi-
cians and grief counselors recognize that the duration is more commonly 1–2 years. A detailed
footnote has replaced the more simplistic DSM- IV exclusion to aid clinicians in making the
critical distinction between the symptoms characteristic of be reavement and those of a major
depressive disorder. Finally, a new specifier to  indicate the presence of mixed symptoms has
been added across both the bipo lar and the depressive disorders.
Anxiety Disorders
The chapter on anxiety disorders no longer includes obsessive-compulsive disorder (which
is in the new chapter “Obsessive-Compulsiv e and Related Disorders”) or posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and acut e stress disorder (which are in the new chapter “Trauma-
and Stressor-Related Disorders”). Changes in criteria for specific phobia  and social anxiety
disorder (social phobia)  include deletion of the requirement that individuals over age 18
years recognize that their anxiet y is excessive or unreasonable . Instead, the anxiety must be
out of proportion to the actual danger or threat  in the situation, after cultural contextual fac-
tors are taken into account. In addition, the 6-month duration is now extended to all ages.
Panic attacks  can now be listed as a specifier that is applicable to all DSM-5 disorders. Panic
disorder  and agoraphobia  are unlinked in DSM-5. Thus, the former DSM-IV diagnoses of
panic disorder with agoraphobia, panic disorder without agoraphobia, and agoraphobia
without history of panic disorder are now replaced by two diagnoses, panic disorder and ag-
oraphobia, each with separate crit eria. The “generalized” specifier for social anxiety disor-
der has been deleted and replaced with a “performance only” specifier. Separation anxiety
disorder  and selective mutism  are now classified as anxiety di sorders. The wording of the
criteria is modified to more adequately repres ent the expression of se paration anxiety symp-
toms in adulthood. Also, in contrast to DSM-IV, the diagnostic criteria no longer specify that
onset must be before age 18 years, and a duration statement—“typically lasting for 6 months
or more”—has been added for adults to minimize overdia gnosis of transient fears.
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
The chapter “Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders” is new in DSM-5. New disor-
ders include hoarding disorder, excoriation (skin-pi cking) disorder, substance/medica-
tion-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder,  and obsessive-compulsive and
related disorder due to another medical condition.  The DSM-IV diagnosis of trichotillo-
mania is now termed trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) and has been moved from a
DSM-IV classification of impulse-control di sorders not elsewhere classified to obsessive-
compulsive and related disorders in DSM-5. The DSM-IV “with poor insight” specifier for
obsessive-compulsive disorder  has been refined to allow a distinction between individuals
with good or fair insight, poor insight, and “absent insight/delusional” obsessive-compul-
sive disorder beliefs (i.e., comp lete conviction that obsessive-compulsive disorder beliefs
are true). Analogous “insight” specifiers have  been included for body dysmorphic disorder
and hoarding disorder. A “tic-related” specifier for obsessive-compuls ive disorder has also
been added, because presence of a comorbid tic disorder may have important clinical im-
plications. A “muscle dy smorphia” specifier for body dysmorphic disorder  is added to re-
flect a growing literature on the diagnostic validity and clinical utility of making this
812 Highlights of Changes From DSM-IV to DSM-5
distinction in individuals with body dysmorphic disorder. The delusional variant of body
dysmorphic disorder (which identifies individu als who are completely convinced that their
perceived defects or flaws are truly abnormal ap pearing) is no longer coded as both delu-
sional disorder, somatic type, and body dysmorph ic disorder; in DSM-5, this presentation is
designated only as body dysmorphic disorder with the absent insight/delusional specifier.
Individuals can also be diagnosed with other specified obsessive-compulsive and related
disorder, which can include conditions such as body-focused repetitive behavior disorder
and obsessional jealousy, or unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder.
Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
For a diagnosis of acute stress disorder,  qualifying traumatic events are now explicit as to
whether they were experienced directly, witnessed, or experienced indirectly. Also, the
DSM-IV Criterion A2 regarding the subjective reaction to th e traumatic event (e.g., expe-
riencing “fear, helplessness, or  horror”) has been eliminated. Adjustment disorders  are
reconceptualized as a heterogeneous array of  stress-response syndromes that occur after
exposure to a distressing (traum atic or nontraumatic) event, rather than as a residual cat-
egory for individuals who exhibit clinically  significant distress but whose symptoms do
not meet criteria for a more d iscrete disorder (as in DSM-IV).
DSM-5 criteria for PTSD differ significantly from the DS M-IV criteria. The stressor cri-
terion (Criterion A) is more ex plicit with regard to events that qualify as “traumatic” ex-
periences. Also, DSM-IV Criterion A2 (subje ctive reaction) has been eliminated. Whereas
there were three major symptom clusters in DSM-IV—reexperiencing, avoidance/numb-
ing, and arousal—there are no w four symptom clusters in DSM-5, because the avoidance/
numbing cluster is divided into two distinct clusters: avoidance and persistent negative al-
terations in cognitions and mood. This latter  category, which retains most of the DSM-IV
numbing symptoms, also includes new or re conceptualized symptoms, such as persistent
negative emotional states. The final cluster— alterations in arousal and reactivity—retains
most of the DSM-IV arousal symptoms. It also includes irritable behavior or angry out-
bursts and reckless or self-destructive beha vior. PTSD is now develo pmentally sensitive in
that diagnostic thresholds have been lowe red for children and adolescents. Furthermore,
separate criteria have been added for childre n age 6 years or younger with this disorder.
The DSM-IV childhood diagno sis reactive attachment di sorder had two subtypes:
emotionally withdrawn/inhibited and indiscri minately social/disinhibited. In DSM-5,
these subtypes are defined as distinct disorders: reactive attachment disorder  and disin-
hibited social engagement disorder.
Dissociative Disorders
Major changes in dissociative disorders in DS M-5 include the following: 1) derealization is
included in the name and symptom structure of what previously was called depersonali-
zation disorder ( depersonalization/derealization disorder ); 2) dissociative fugue is now a
specifier of dissociative amnesia rather than a separate diagnosis, and 3) the criteria for
dissociative identity disorder  have been changed to indicate that symptoms of disruption
of identity may be reported as well as observed, and that gaps in the recall of events may
occur for everyday and not just traumatic ev ents. Also, experiences of pathological pos-
session in some cultures are included in the description of identity disruption.
Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
In DSM-5, somatoform disorders are now referred to as somatic symptom and related dis-
orders.  The DSM-5 classification reduces the number of these disorders and subcategories to
avoid problematic overlap. Diagnoses of somatization disorder, hypochondriasis, pain dis-
order, and undifferentiated somatoform diso rder have been removed. Individuals previ-
Highlights of Changes From DSM-IV to DSM-5 813
ously diagnosed with somatization disorder wi ll usually have sympto ms that meet DSM-5
criteria for somatic symptom disorder,  but only if they have th e maladaptive thoughts, feel-
ings, and behaviors that define the disorder, in addition to their somatic symptoms. Because
the distinction between somati zation disorder and undifferen tiated somatoform disorder
was arbitrary, they are merged in DSM-5 un der somatic symptom diso rder. Individuals pre-
viously diagnosed with hypochondriasis who have high health anxiety but no somatic symp-
toms would receive a DSM-5 diagnosis of illness anxiety disorder (unless their health
anxiety was better explained by  a primary anxiety disorder, su ch as generalized anxiety dis-
order). Some individuals with chronic pain w ould be appropriately di agnosed as having so-
matic symptom disorder, with predominant pain . For others, psychological factors affecting
other medical conditions or an adjustment disorder would be more appropriate.
Psychological factors affect ing other medical conditions  is a new mental disorder in
DSM-5, having formerly been listed in the DSM-IV chapter “Other Conditions That May
Be a Focus of Clinical At tention.” This disorder and factitious disorder  are placed among
the somatic symptom and related disorders because somatic symptoms are predominant
in both disorders, and both are most often en countered in medical settings. The variants of
psychological factors affecting other medical conditions are removed in favor of the stem
diagnosis. Criteria for conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder)
have been modified to emphasize the essent ial importance of the neurological examina-
tion, and in recognition that relevant psychological factors may not be demonstrable at the
time of diagnosis. Other spec ified somatic symptom disorder , other specified illness anx-
iety disorder, and pseudocyesis ar e now the only exemplars of the other specified somatic
symptom and related disorder classification.
Feeding and Eating Disorders
Because of the elimination of the DSM-IV-TR chapter “Disorders Us ually First Diagnosed
During Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence,” th is chapter describes several disorders found in
the DSM-IV section “Feeding and Eating Disord ers of Infancy or Early Childhood,” such as
pica  and rumination disorder.  The DSM-IV category feeding disorder of infancy or early
childhood has been renamed avoidant/restrictive f ood intake disorder,  and the criteria are
significantly expanded. The core diagnostic criteria for anorexia nervosa  are conceptually un-
changed from DSM-IV with one exception: the requirement for amenorrhea is eliminated. As
in DSM-IV, individuals with this disorder are requ ired by Criterion A to be at a significantly
low body weight for their developmental stage.  The wording of the criterion is changed for
clarification, and guidan ce regarding how to judge whether an individual is at or below a sig-
nificantly low weight is provided in the text. In  DSM-5, Criterion B is expanded to include not
only overtly expressed fear of weight gain but also persistent behavior that interferes with
weight gain. The only change in the DSM-IV criteria for bulimia nervosa  is a reduction in the
required minimum average frequency of binge eating and inappropri ate compensatory be-
havior frequency from twice to once weekly. The extensive research that followed the prom-
ulgation of preliminary criteria for binge-eating disorder  in Appendix B of DSM-IV
documented the clinical utility and validity of binge-eating disorder. The only significant dif-
ference from the prelimin ary criteria is that the minimum average frequency of binge eating re-
quired for diagnosis is once weekly over the la st 3 months, identical to the frequency criterion
for bulimia nervosa (rather than at least 2 days a week for 6 months in DSM-IV).
Elimination Disorders
There have been no significant changes in this diagnostic class from DSM-IV to DSM-5.
The disorders in this chapter were previously  classified under disorders usually first di-
agnosed in infancy, childhood, or adolescenc e in DSM-IV and exist now as an independent
classification in DSM-5.
814 Highlights of Changes From DSM-IV to DSM-5
Sleep-Wake Disorders
In DSM-5, the DSM-IV diagnose s named sleep disorder related to another mental disorder
and sleep disorder related to another medica l condition have been removed, and instead
greater specification of coexisting conditions is provided for each sleep-wake disorder. The
diagnosis of primary insomnia has been renamed insomnia disorder  to avoid the differen-
tiation between primary and secondary insomnia. DSM-5 also distinguishes narcolepsy —
now known to be associated with hypocretin deficiency—from other forms of hypersomno-
lence (hypersomnolence disorder ). Finally, throughout the DSM-5 classification of sleep-
wake disorders, pediatric and developmental cr iteria and text are integrated where existing
science and considerations of clinical utility support such integration. Breathing-related
sleep disorders are divided into three relatively distinct disorders: obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea, central sleep apnea, and sleep-related hypoventilation. The subtypes of circadian
rhythm sleep disorders  are expanded to include advanced  sleep phase type and irregular
sleep-wake type, whereas the jet lag type has b een removed. The use of the former “not oth-
erwise specified” diagnoses in DSM- IV have been reduced by elevating rapid eye move-
ment sleep behavior disorder  and restless legs syndrome  to independent disorders.
Sexual Dysfunctions
In DSM-5, some gender-specifi c sexual dysfunctions have been added, and, for females,
sexual desire and arousal disorders have  been combined into one disorder: female sexual
interest/arousal disorder.  All of the sexual dysfunctions (except substance/medication-in-
duced sexual dysfunction ) now require a minimum duration of approximately 6 months and
more precise severity criteria. Genito-pelvic pain/p enetration disorder  has been added to
DSM-5 and represents a merging of vaginismus and dyspareunia, which were highly co-
morbid and difficult to distinguish. The diagno sis of sexual aversion disorder has been re-
moved due to rare use and la ck of supporting research.
There are now only two subtyp es for sexual dysfunctions: lifelong versus  acquired
and generalized  versus situational.  To indicate the presence and degree of medical and
other nonmedical correlates, the following associated features  have been added to the text:
partner factors, relationship factors, individu al vulnerability factors, cultural or religious
factors, and medical factors.
Gender Dysphoria
Gender dysphoria  is a new diagnostic class in DSM-5 and reflects a change in conceptual-
ization of the disorder’s defining features by emphasizing the phenomenon of “gender in-
congruence” rather than cross-gender identification per se, as was the case in DSM-IV gender
identity disorder. Gender dyspho ria includes separate sets of criteria: for children and for
adults and adolescents. For the adolescents an d adults criteria, the previous Criterion A
(cross-gender identification) and Criterion B (aversion toward one’s gender) are merged. In
the wording of the criteria, “the other sex” is replaced by “the other gender” (or “some alter-
native gender”).” Gender  instead of sex is used systematically because the concept “sex” is in-
adequate when referring to individuals with a disorder of sex development. In the child
criteria, “strong desire to be of the other gend er” replaces the previous “repeatedly stated de-
sire to be...the other sex” to capture the situat ion of some children who, in a coercive envi-
ronment, may not verbalize the desire to be of  another gender. For child ren, Criterion A1 (“a
strong desire to be of the other gender or an in sistence that he or she is the other gender.. .)”
is now necessary (but not sufficient), which makes the diagnosi s more restrictive and conser-
vative. The subtyping on the basis of sexual or ientation is removed because the distinction is
no longer considered clinically useful. A posttransition specifier  has been added to identify
Highlights of Changes From DSM-IV to DSM-5 815
individuals who have undergone at least one medical procedure or treatment to support the
new gender assignment (e.g., cross-sex hormon e treatment). Although the concept of post-
transition is modeled on the concept of full or partial remission, the term remission  has impli-
cations in terms of symptom reduction that do not apply directly to gender dysphoria.
Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders
The chapter “Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct Disorders” is new to DSM-5 and
combines disorders that were pr eviously included in the chapte r “Disorders Usually First Di-
agnosed in Infancy, Childhood, or Adolescence” (i.e., oppositional defiant disorder; conduct
disorder; and disruptive behavior disorder not otherwise specified, now categorized as other
specified and unspecified disrup tive, impulse-control, and cond uct disorders) and the chap-
ter “Impulse-Control Disorders Not Elsewhere Cl assified” (i.e., intermittent explosive disor-
der, pyromania, and kleptomania). These diso rders are all characterized by problems in
emotional and behavioral self-control. Notably,  ADHD is frequently comorbid with the dis-
orders in this chapter but is listed with the neurodevelopmental disorders. Because of its
close association with co nduct disorder, antisocial  personality disorder is listed both in this
chapter and in the chapter “Personality Diso rders,” where it is described in detail.
The criteria for oppositional defiant disorder  are now grouped into three types: an-
gry/irritable mood, argumentative/defiant be havior, and vindictiveness. Additionally,
the exclusionary criterion for conduct diso rder has been removed. The criteria for conduct
disorder include a descriptive features specifier for individuals who meet full criteria for
the disorder but al so present with limited prosocial emotions. The primary change in in-
termittent explosive disorder  is in the type of aggressive outbursts that should be consid-
ered: DSM-IV required physical aggression, whereas in DSM-5 verbal aggression and
nondestructive/noninjurious physical aggression  also meet criteria. DSM-5 also provides
more specific criteria defining  frequency needed to meet the criteria and specifies that the
aggressive outbursts ar e impulsive and/or anger based in nature, and must cause marked
distress, cause impairment in occupational or interpersonal functioning, or be associated
with negative financial or legal consequences. Furthermore, a minimum age of 6 years (or
equivalent developmental level) is now required.
Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
An important departure from past diagnostic ma nuals is that the chapter on substance-related
disorders has been expanded to include gambling disorder. Another key change is that
DSM-5 does not separate the diagnoses of substance abuse  and dependence  as in DSM-IV. Rather
criteria are provided for substance use disorder,  accompanied by criteria for intoxication,
withdrawal, substance-induced disorders, and unspecified substance-related disorders,
where relevant. Within substance use disorders,  the DSM-IV recurrent substance-related legal
problems criterion has been dele ted from DSM-5, and a new criter ion—craving, or a strong de-
sire or urge to use a substance—has been adde d. In addition, the thre shold for substance use
disorder diagnosis in DSM-5 is set at two or more  criteria, in contrast to a threshold of one or
more criteria for a diagnosis of DSM-IV substance abuse and three or more for DSM-IV depen-
dence. Cannabis withdrawal and caffeine withdrawal  are new disorders (the latter was in
DSM-IV Appendix B, “Criteria Sets and Axes Provided for Further Study”).
Severity  of the DSM-5 substance use disorders is  based on the number of criteria en-
dorsed. The DSM-IV specifier fo r a physiological subtype is eliminated in DSM-5, as is the
DSM-IV diagnosis of polysubstance dependence. Early remission from a DSM-5 substance
use disorder is defined as at least 3 but less than 12 months without meeting substance use
disorder criteria (except crav ing), and sustained remission is defined as at least 12 months
without meeting criteria (except craving). Additional new DSM-5 specifiers include “in a
controlled environment”  and “on maintenance therapy”  as the situation warrants.
816 Highlights of Changes From DSM-IV to DSM-5
Neurocognitive Disorders
The DSM-IV diagnoses of dementia and amnestic disorder are subsumed under the newly
named entity major neurocognitive disorder  (NCD). The term dementia  is not precluded from
use in the etiological subtypes where that te rm is standard. Furthermore, DSM-5 now recog-
nizes a less severe level of cognitive impairment, mild NCD,  which is a new disorder that per-
mits the diagnosis of less disabling syndromes that may nonetheless be the focus of concern
and treatment. Diagnostic criteria  are provided for both of these disorders, foll owed by diag-
nostic criteria for different etiological subtypes.  In DSM-IV, individual diagnoses were desig-
nated for dementia of the Alzheimer’s type , vascular dementia, and substance-induced
dementia, whereas the other neurodegenerative disorders were classified as dementia due to
another medical condition, with HIV, head trauma, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease,
Pick’s disease, Creutzfeldt-Jako b disease, and other medical co nditions specified. In DSM-5,
major or mild NCD due to Alzheimer’s disease and major or mild vascular NCD have been re-
tained, while new separate criteria are now presented for major or mild frontotemporal NCD,
NCD with Lewy bodies, and NCDs due to trau matic brain injury, a substance/medication,
HIV infection, prion disease, Parkinson’s diseas e, Huntington’s disease, another medical con-
dition, and multiple etiologies, respectively. Un specified NCD is also included as a diagnosis.
Personality Disorders
The criteria for personality disorders in Sectio n II of DSM-5 have not changed from those in
DSM-IV. An alternative approach to the diag nosis of personality di sorders was developed
for DSM-5 for further study and can be found in Section III (see “Alternative DSM-5 Model
for Personality Disorders”). For the general criteria for personality disorder, presented  in
Section III, a revised personality functioning criterion (Criterion A) has been developed
based on a literature review of reliable clinical  measures of core impa irments central to per-
sonality pathology. A diagnosis of personality disorder—trait specified,  based on moderate
or greater impairment in person ality functioning and the presence of pathological personal-
ity traits, replaces personality disorder not ot herwise specified and prov ides a much more in-
formative diagnosis for individuals who are not optimally described as having a specific
personality disorder. A greater emphasis on pe rsonality functioning and trait-based criteria
increases the stability and empiri cal bases of the disorders. Personality functioning and per-
sonality traits  also can be assessed whether or not the individual has a personality disor-
der—a feature that provides clinically useful information about all individuals.
Paraphilic Disorders
An overarching change from DSM-IV is the addition of the course specifiers “in a controlled
environment”  and “in remission”  to the diagnostic criteria se ts for all the paraphilic disor-
ders. These specifiers are added to indicate important changes in an individual’s status. In
DSM-5, paraphilias are not ipso facto  mental disorders. There is a distinction between paraphil-
ias and paraphilic disorders. A paraphilic disorder is a paraphilia that is currently causing dis-
tress or impairment to the individual or a pa raphilia whose satisfaction has entailed personal
harm, or risk of harm, to others. A paraphilia is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for
having a paraphilic disorder, and a paraphilia by it self does not automatically justify or require
clinical intervention. The distinction between paraphilias and paraphilic disorders was im-
plemented without making any changes to the basi c structure of the diagnostic criteria as they
had existed since DSM-III-R. Th e change proposed for DSM-5 is that individuals who meet
both Criterion A and Criterion B would now be diagnosed as having a paraphilic disorder. A
diagnosis would not be given to  individuals whose symptoms meet Criterion A but not Cri-
terion B—that is, to individuals who have  a paraphilia but not a paraphilic disorder. 
817Glossary of
 Technical Terms
affect A pattern of observable behaviors that is the expression of a subjectively experi-
enced feeling state (emotion). Examples of af fect include sadness, elation, and anger. In
contrast to mood,  which refers to a pervasive and sustained emotional “climate,” affect
refers to more fluctuating changes in emot ional “weather.” What is considered the nor-
mal range of the expression of affect varies  considerably, both within and among dif-
ferent cultures. Disturba nces in affect include
blunted Significant reduction in the inte nsity of emotional expression.
flat Absence or near absence of an y sign of affective expression.
inappropriate Discordance between affective expression and the content of speech
or ideation.
labile Abnormal variability in affect with repeated, rapid, and abrupt shifts in af-
fective expression.
restricted or constricted Mild reduction in the range and intensity of emotional ex-
pression.
affective blunting See AFFECT .
agitation (psychomotor) See PSYCHOMOTOR  AGITATION .
agnosia Loss of ability to recognize objects, persons, sounds, shapes, or smells that occurs
in the absence of either impairment of the specific sense or significant memory loss.
alogia An impoverishment in thinking that is inferred from observing speech and lan-
guage behavior. There may be brief and concre te replies to questions and restriction in
the amount of spontaneous speech (termed poverty of speech ). Sometimes the speech is
adequate in amount but conveys little inform ation because it is overconcrete, overab-
stract, repetitive, or stereotyped (termed poverty of content ).
amnesia An inability to recall important autobiog raphical information that is inconsis-
tent with ordinary forgetting.
anhedonia Lack of enjoyment from, engagement in , or energy for life’s experiences; def-
icits in the capacity to feel pleasure and take interest in things. Anhedonia is a facet of
the broad personality trait domain D ETACHMENT .
anosognosia A condition in which a person with an illness seems unaware of the exis-
tence of his or her illness.
antagonism Behaviors that put an individual at od ds with other people, such as an ex-
aggerated sense of self-importance with a concomitant expectation of special treat-
ment, as well as a callous antipathy toward others, encompassing both unawareness of
others’ needs and feelings, and a readiness to use others in the service of self-enhance-
ment. Antagonism is one of the five broad PERSONALITY  TRAIT  DOMAINS  defined in Sec-
tion III “Alternative DSM-5 Mo del for Personality Disorders.”
SMALL  CAPS  indicate term found elsewhere in this glossary. Glossary definitions were informed by
DSM-5 Work Groups, publicly available Internet so urces, and previously published glossaries for
mental disorders (World Heal th Organization and American  Psychiatric Association).
818 Glossary of Technical Terms
antidepressant discontinuation syndrome A set of symptoms that can occur after
abrupt cessation, or marked reduction in dose, of an antidepressant medication that
had been taken continuously for at least 1 month.
anxiety The apprehensive anticipation of future  danger or misfortune accompanied by
a feeling of worry, distress, an d/or somatic symptoms of tension. The focus of antici-
pated danger may be internal or external.
anxiousness Feelings of nervousness or tenseness in reaction to diverse situations; frequent
worry about the negative effect s of past unpleasant experiences and future negative possi-
bilities; feeling fearful and apprehensive about uncertainty; expecting the worst to happen.
Anxiousness is a facet of the broad personality trait domain N EGATIVE  AFFECTIVITY .
arousal The physiological and psychological state of  being awake or reactive to stimuli.
asociality A reduced initiative for interacting with other people.
attention The ability to focus in a sustained manner on a particular stimulus or activity.
A disturbance in attention ma y be manifested by easy DISTRACTIBILITY  or difficulty in
finishing tasks or in concentrating on work.
attention seeking Engaging in behavior designed to attract notice and to make oneself
the focus of others’ attention and admiration . Attention seeking is a facet of the broad
personality trait domain ANTAGONISM .
autogynephilia Sexual arousal of a natal male associated with the idea or image of being
a woman.
avoidance The act of keeping away from stress-rela ted circumstances; a tendency to cir-
cumvent cues, activities, and situations that remind the individual of a stressful event
experienced.
avolition An inability to initiate and persist in go al-directed activities . When severe enough
to be considered pathological, avolition is pervasive and prevents the person from com-
pleting many different types of activities (e.g., work, intellectual pursuits, self-care).
bereavement The state of having lost through death someone with whom one has had
a close relationship. This state includes a range of grief and mourning responses.
biological rhythms See CIRCADIAN  RHYTHMS .
callousness Lack of concern for the feelings or problems of others; lack of guilt or re-
morse about the negative or harmful effects of one’s actions on others. Callousness is a
facet of the broad personality trait domain ANTAGONISM .
catalepsy Passive induction of a posture held  against gravity. Compare with WAXY  FLEX -
IBILITY .
cataplexy Episodes of sudden bilateral loss of mu scle tone resulting in the individual
collapsing, often occurring in association wi th intense emotions such as laughter, an-
ger, fear, or surprise.
circadian rhythms Cyclical variations in physiological and biochemical function, level
of sleep-wake activity, and emotional state. Circadian rhythms have a cycle of about 24
hours, ultradian rhythms have a cycle that is shorter than 1 day, and infradian rhythms
have a cycle that may last weeks or months.
cognitive and perceptual dysregulation Odd or unusual thought processes and experi-
ences, including DEPERSONALIZATION , DEREALIZATION , and DISSOCIATION ; mixed sleep-
wake state experiences; and thought-cont rol experiences. Cognitive and perceptual
dysregulation is a facet of the broad personality trait domain P SYCHOTICISM .
coma State of complete loss of consciousness.
Glossary of Technical Terms 819
compulsion Repetitive behaviors (e.g., hand wash ing, ordering, checking) or mental
acts (e.g., praying, counting, repeating word s silently) that the individual feels driven
to perform in response to an obsession, or according to rules that must be applied rig-
idly. The behaviors or mental acts are aimed at preventing or redu cing anxiety or dis-
tress, or preventing some dreaded event or situation; however, these behaviors or
mental acts are not connected in a realistic way with what they are designed to neutral-
ize or prevent or are clearly excessive.
conversion symptom A loss of, or alteration in, voluntary motor or sensory functioning,
with or without apparent impairment of consciousness. The symptom is not fully ex-
plained by a neurological or another medical condition or the direct effects of a sub-
stance and is not intentiona lly produced or feigned.
deceitfulness Dishonesty and fraudulence; misrep resentation of self; embellishment or
fabrication when relating even ts. Deceitfulness is a facet of the broad personality trait
domain A NTAGONISM .
defense mechanism Mechanisms that mediate the indi vidual´s reaction to emotional
conflicts and to external stressors. Some defense mechanisms (e.g., projection, splitting,
acting out) are almost invariably maladapt ive. Others (e.g., suppression, denial) may
be either maladaptive or adaptive, dependin g on their severity, their inflexibility, and
the context in which they occur.
delusion A false belief based on incorrect inferenc e about external reality that is firmly
held despite what almost everyone else beli eves and despite what constitutes incontro-
vertible and obvious proof or evidence to th e contrary. The belief is not ordinarily ac-
cepted by other members of the person’s culture or subculture (i.e., it is not an article of
religious faith). When a false belief involves a value judgment, it is regarded as a delusion
only when the judgment is so extreme as to defy credibility. Delusional conviction can
sometimes be inferred from an overvalued idea (in which case the individual has an un-
reasonable belief or idea but does not hold it as firmly as is the case with a delusion). De-
lusions are subdivided according to thei r content. Common types are listed below:
bizarre A delusion that involves a phenomenon that the person’s culture would re-
gard as physically impossible.
delusional jealousy A delusion that one’s sexual partner is unfaithful.
erotomanic A delusion that another person, usually of higher status, is in love with
the individual.
grandiose A delusion of inflated worth, power, knowledge, identity, or special re-
lationship to a deity or famous person.
mixed type Delusions of more than one type (e.g., EROTOMANIC , GRANDIOSE , PERSE -
CUTORY , SOMATIC ) in which no one theme predominates.
mood-congruent See MOOD -CONGRUENT  PSYCHOTIC  FEATURES .
mood-incongruent See MOOD -INCONGRUENT  PSYCHOTIC  FEATURES .
of being controlled A delusion in which feelings, impulses, thoughts, or actions
are experienced as being under the control of some external force rather than be-
ing under one’s own control.
of reference A delusion in which events, objects, or other persons in one’s immedi-
ate environment are seen as having a particular and unusual significance. These
delusions are usually of a negative or pejo rative nature but also may be grandiose
in content. A delusion of reference differs from an idea of reference,  in which the
false belief is not as firmly held nor as fully organized into a true belief.
persecutory A delusion in which the central theme is that one (or someone to whom
one is close) is being attacked, harassed, cheated, persecuted, or conspired against.
820 Glossary of Technical Terms
somatic A delusion whose main content pertains  to the appearance or functioning
of one’s body.
thought broadcasting A delusion that one’s thoughts are being broadcast out loud
so that they can be perceived by others.
thought insertion A delusion that certain of one’s thoughts are not one´s own, but
rather are inserted into one’s mind.
depersonalization The experience of feeling detached from, and as if one is an outside
observer of, one’s mental processes, body, or  actions (e.g., feeling like one is in a dream;
a sense of unreality of self, perceptual al terations; emotional and/or physical numbing;
temporal distortions; sense of unreality).
depressivity Feelings of being intensely sad, mise rable, and/or hopeless. Some patients
describe an absence of feelings and/or dy sphoria; difficulty recovering from such
moods; pessimism about the fu ture; pervasive shame and/or guilt; feelings of inferior
self-worth; and thoughts of suicide and suicid al behavior. Depressivity is a facet of the
broad personality trait domain D ETACHMENT .
derealization The experience of feeling detached from, and as if one is an outside ob-
server of, one’s surroundings  (e.g., individuals or obje cts are experienced as unreal,
dreamlike, foggy, lifeless, or visually distorted).
detachment Avoidance of socioemotional experience, including both WITHDRAWAL  from
interpersonal interactions (rangi ng from casual, daily interactions to friendships and inti-
mate relationships [i.e., INTIMACY  AVOIDANCE ]) and RESTRICTED  AFFECTIVITY , particularly
limited hedonic capacity. Detachment is one of the five pathological PERSONALITY  TRAIT
DOMAINS  defined in Section III “Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders.”
disinhibition Orientation toward immediate gratification, leading to impulsive behav-
ior driven by current thoughts, feelings, an d external stimuli, without regard for past
learning or consideration of future consequences. R IGID PERFECTIONISM , the opposite
pole of this domain, reflects  excessive constraint of impu lses, risk avoidance, hyper-
responsibility, hyperperfectio nism, and rigid, rule-govern ed behavior. Disinhibition
is one of the five pathological PERSONALITY  TRAIT  DOMAINS  defined in Section III “Al-
ternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders.”
disorder of sex development Condition of significant inborn somatic deviations of the
reproductive tract from the norm and/or of  discrepancies among the biological indica-
tors of male and female.
disorientation Confusion about the time of day, date, or season (time); where one is
(place); or who one is (person).
dissociation The splitting off of clusters of ment al contents from conscious awareness.
Dissociation is a mechanism central to dissocia tive disorders. The term is also used to
describe the separation of an idea from its emotional significance and affect, as seen in
the inappropriate affect in schizophrenia. Of ten a result of psychic trauma, dissociation
may allow the individual to maintain allegiance to two contradictory truths while re-
maining unconscious of the contradiction. An extreme manifestatio n of dissociation is
dissociative identity disorder, in which a person may exhibit several independent per-
sonalities, each unaware of the others.
distractibility Difficulty concentrating and focusing on  tasks; attention is easily divert-
ed by extraneous stimuli; difficulty main taining goal-focused behavior, including both
planning and completing tasks. Distractibilit y is a facet of the broad personality trait
domain D ISINHIBITION .
dysarthria A disorder of speech sound production due to structural or motor impair-
ment affecting the articulatory apparatus. Such disorders include cleft palate, muscle
Glossary of Technical Terms 821
disorders, cranial nerve disorders, and cerebr al palsy affecting bulbar structures (i.e.,
lower and upper motor neuron disorders).
dyskinesia Distortion of voluntary movements with involuntary muscle activity.
dysphoria (dysphoric mood) A condition in which a person experiences intense feelings
of depression, discontent, and in some case s indifference to th e world around them.
dyssomnias Primary disorders of sleep or wakefulness characterized by INSOMNIA  or
HYPERSOMNIA  as the major presenting symptom.  Dyssomnias are disorders of the
amount, quality, or timing of sleep. Compare with PARASOMNIAS .
dysthymia Presence, while depressed, of two or more of the following: 1) poor appetite
or overeating, 2) insomnia or hypersomnia, 3) low energy or fatigue, 4) low self-esteem,
5) poor concentration or difficulty making decisions, or 6) feelings of hopelessness.
dystonia Disordered tonicity of muscles.
eccentricity Odd, unusual, or bizarre behavior , appearance, and/or speech having
strange and unpredictable thoughts; saying un usual or inappropriate things. Eccentric-
ity is a facet of the broad personality trait domain P SYCHOTICISM . 
echolalia The pathological, parrotlike, and apparently senseless repetition (echoing) of
a word or phrase just spoken by another person.
echopraxia Mimicking the movements of another.
emotional lability Instability of emotional experience s and mood; emotions that are
easily aroused, intense, and/or out of proportion to events and circumstances. Emo-
tional lability is a facet of the broad personality trait domain NEGATIVE  AFFECTIVITY .
empathy Comprehension and appreciation of othe rs’ experiences and motivations; tol-
erance of differing perspectives; understand ing the effects of own behavior on others.
episode (episodic) A specified duration of time during which the patient has developed or
experienced symptoms that meet the diagnostic  criteria for a given mental disorder. De-
pending on the type of mental disorder, episode  may denote a certain number of symptoms
or a specified severity or frequency of symptoms. Episodes may be further differentiated
as a single (first) episode or a recurrence or relapse of mult iple episodes if appropriate.
euphoria A mental and emotional condition in wh ich a person experiences intense feel-
ings of well-being, elation, happiness, excitement, and joy.
fatigability Tendency to become easily fatigued. See also  FATIGUE .
fatigue A state (also called exhaustion, tiredness, lethargy, languidness, languor, lassi-
tude, and listlessness) usually associated with a weakening or depletion of one’s phys-
ical and/or mental resources,  ranging from a general state of lethargy to a specific,
work-induced burning sensation within one’s muscles. Physical fatigue leads to an in-
ability to continue functioning at one’s norm al level of activity. Although widespread
in everyday life, this state usually becomes particularly noticeable during heavy exer-
cise. Mental fatigue, by contrast, most often manifests as SOMNOLENCE  (sleepiness).
fear An emotional response to perceived imminent threat or danger associated with
urges to flee or fight.
flashback A dissociative state during which aspe cts of a traumatic event are reexperi-
enced as though they were occurring at that moment.
flight of ideas A nearly continuous flow of accele rated speech with abrupt changes
from topic to topic that are usually based on understandable associations, distracting
stimuli, or plays on words. When the cond ition is severe, speech may be disorganized
and incoherent.
822 Glossary of Technical Terms
gender The public (and usually legally recogniz ed) lived role as boy or girl, man or
woman. Biological factors are seen as contri buting in interaction with social and psy-
chological factors to gender development.
gender assignment The initial assignment as male or female, which usually occurs at
birth and is subseque ntly referred to as  the “natal gender.”
gender dysphoria Distress that accompanies the incongruence between one’s experi-
enced and expressed gender and one’s assigned or natal gender.
gender experience The unique and personal ways in which individuals experience their
gender in the context of the gender roles provided by their societies.
gender expression The specific ways in which indivi duals enact gender roles provided
in their societies.
gender identity A category of social identity that refers to an individual’s identification
as male, female or, occasionally, some category other than male or female.
gender reassignment A change of gender that can be  either medical (hormones, sur-
gery) or legal (government reco gnition), or both. In case of  medical interventions, often
referred to as sex reassignment.
geometric hallucination See HALLUCINATION .
grandiosity Believing that one is superi or to others and deserves special treatment; self-
centeredness; feelings of entitlement; co ndescension toward others. Grandiosity is a
facet of the broad personality trait domain ANTAGONISM .
grimace (grimacing) Odd and inappropriate facial expressions unrelated to situation
(as seen in individuals with CATATONIA ).
hallucination A perception-like experience with the clarity and impact of a true percep-
tion but without the external stimulation of  the relevant sensory organ. Hallucinations
should be distinguished from ILLUSIONS , in which an actual external stimulus is
misperceived or misinterpreted. The person may or may not have insight into the non-
veridical nature of the hallucination. One hallucinating person may recognize the false
sensory experience, whereas another may be convinced that the ex perience is grounded
in reality. The term hallucination  is not ordinarily applied to the false perceptions that
occur during dreaming, while falling asleep ( hypnagogic ), or upon awakening ( hypno-
pompic ). Transient hallucinatory experiences may occur without a mental disorder.
auditory A hallucination involving the perception of sound, most commonly of
voice.
geometric Visual hallucinations involving geometric shapes such as tunnels and
funnels, spirals, la ttices, or cobwebs.
gustatory A hallucination involving the percepti on of taste (usually unpleasant).
mood-congruent See MOOD -CONGRUENT  PSYCHOTIC  FEATURES .
mood-incongruent See MOOD -INCONGRUENT  PSYCHOTIC  FEATURES .
olfactory A hallucination involving the perception of odor, such as of burning rub-
ber or decaying fish.
somatic A hallucination involving the perception of physical experience localized
within the body (e.g., a feeling of electric ity). A somatic hallucination is to be dis-
tinguished from physical sensations arisin g from an as-yet-u ndiagnosed general
medical condition, from hypochondriacal preoccupation with normal physical
sensations, or from a tactile hallucination.
tactile A hallucination involving the perception  of being touched or of something
being under one’s skin. The most common tactile hallucinations are the sensation
Glossary of Technical Terms 823
of electric shocks and formication (the sensation of somethin g creeping or crawl-
ing on or under the skin).
visual A hallucination involving sight, which may consist of formed images, such as of
people, or of unformed images, such as fl ashes of light. Visual hallucinations should
be distinguished from ILLUSIONS , which are misperceptions of real external stimuli.
hostility Persistent or frequent  angry feelings; anger or irri tability in response to minor
slights and insults; mean, nasty, or vengeful  behavior. Hostility is a facet of the broad
personality trait domain ANTAGONISM .
hyperacusis Increased auditory perception.
hyperorality A condition in which inappropriate objects are placed in the mouth.
hypersexuality A stronger than usual urge to have sexual activity.
hypersomnia Excessive sleepiness, as evidenced by  prolonged nocturnal sleep, difficul-
ty maintaining an alert awake state during  the day, or undesired daytime sleep epi-
sodes. See also SOMNOLENCE .
hypervigilance An enhanced state of sensory sensit ivity accompanied by an exaggerated
intensity of behaviors whose purpose is to dete ct threats. Hypervigilance is also accompa-
nied by a state of increased anxiety which can cause exhaustion. Other symptoms include
abnormally increased arousal, a high responsiveness to stimuli, and a continual scanning
of the environment for threats. In hypervigilan ce, there is a perpetual scanning of the envi-
ronment to search for sights, sounds, people, beha viors, smells, or anything else that is rem-
iniscent of threat or trauma. The individual is placed on high alert in order to be certain
danger is not near. Hypervigil ance can lead to a variety of  obsessive behavior patterns, as
well as producing difficulties with social interaction and relationships.
hypomania An abnormality of mood resembling mania but of lesser intensity. See also
MANIA .
hypopnea Episodes of overly shallow breathing or  an abnormally low respiratory rate.
ideas of reference The feeling that causal incidents and external events have a particu-
lar and unusual meaning that is specific to th e person. An idea of reference is to be dis-
tinguished from a DELUSION  OF REFERENCE , in which there is a belief that is held with
delusional conviction.
identity Experience of oneself as unique, with cl ear boundaries betwee n self and others;
stability of self-esteem and accu racy of self-appraisal; capaci ty for, and ability to regu-
late, a range of emotional experience.
illusion A misperception or misinterpr etation of a real external stimulus, such as hear-
ing the rustling of leaves as the sound of voices. See also  HALLUCINATION .
impulsivity Acting on the spur of the moment in response to immediate stimuli; acting
on a momentary basis without a plan or consid eration of outcomes; difficulty establish-
ing and following plans; a sense of urgenc y and self-harming behavior under emotion-
al distress. Impulsivity is a facet of the broad personality trait domain D ISINHIBITION .
incoherence Speech or thinking that is essentially incomprehensible to others because
word or phrases are joined together without a logical or  meaningful connection. This
disturbance occurs within clauses, in contrast to dera ilment, in which the disturbance
is between  clauses. This has sometimes been refe rred to a “word salad” to convey the
degree of linguistic disorgan ization. Mildly ungrammatica l constructions or idiomatic
usages characteristic of a particular region al or cultural backgrounds, lack of educa-
tion, or low intelligence should not be co nsidered incoherence. The term is generally
not applied when there is evidence that the disturbance in speech is due to an aphasia.
insomnia A subjective complaint of difficulty falling or staying asleep or poor sleep quality.
824 Glossary of Technical Terms
intersex condition A condition in which individuals have conflicting or ambiguous bi-
ological indicators of sex.
intimacy Depth and duration of connection with others; desire and capacity for close-
ness; mutuality of regard reflected in interpersonal behavior.
intimacy avoidance Avoidance of close or romantic relationships, interpersonal attach-
ments, and intimate sexual relationships. Intimacy avoidance is a facet of the broad
personality trait domain D ETACHMENT .
irresponsibility Disregard for—and failure to honor— financial and other obligations or
commitments; lack of respect for—and lack of follow-through on—agreements and
promises; carelessness with others’ property. Irresponsibility is a facet of the broad per-
sonality trait domain D ISINHIBITION .
language pragmatics The understanding and use of language in a given context. For
example, the warning “Watch your hands” when issued to a child who is dirty is in-
tended not only to prompt the child to look at his or her hands bu t also to communicate
the admonition “Don’t get anything dirty.”
lethargy A state of decreased mental activity, characterized by sluggishness, drowsi-
ness, inactivity, and reduced alertness.
macropsia The visual perception that objects are larger than they actually are. Compare
with MICROPSIA .
magical thinking The erroneous belief that one’s thoug hts, words, or actions will cause
or prevent a specific outcome in some way that defies commonly understood laws of
cause and effect. Magical thinking may be  a part of normal child development.
mania A mental state of elevated, expansive, or irritable mood and persistently in-
creased level of activity or energy. See also  HYPOMANIA .
manipulativeness Use of subterfuge to influence or  control others; use of seduction,
charm, glibness, or in gratiation to achieve one’s ends. Manipulativeness is a facet of the
broad personality trait domain ANTAGONISM .
mannerism A peculiar and characteristic individual style of movement, action, thought,
or speech.
melancholia (melancholic) A mental state characterized by very severe depression.
micropsia The visual perception that objects are smaller than they actually are. Com-
pare with MACROPSIA .
mixed symptoms The specifier “with mixed features” is applied to mood  episodes during
which subthreshold symptoms from the oppo sing pole are present. Whereas these con-
current “mixed” symptoms are relatively simultaneous, they may also occur closely
juxtaposed in time as a waxing and waning  of individual symptoms of the opposite
pole (i.e., depressive symptoms during hypo manic or manic episodes, and vice versa).
mood A pervasive and sustained em otion that colors the perception of the world. Com-
mon examples of mood include depression, el ation, anger, and anxiety. In contrast to
affect,  which refers to more fluctuating change s in emotional “weather,” mood refers to
a pervasive and sustained emotional “climate.” Types of mood include
dysphoric An unpleasant mood, such as sad ness, anxiety, or irritability.
elevated An exaggerated feeling of well-being,  or euphoria or elation. A person
with elevated mood may desc ribe feeling “high,” “ecstati c,” “on top of the world,”
or “up in the clouds.”
euthymic Mood in the “normal” range, which implies the absence of depressed or
elevated mood.
Glossary of Technical Terms 825
expansive Lack of restraint in expressing one’s feelings, frequently with an over-
valuation of one’s significance or importance.
irritable Easily annoyed and provoked to anger.
mood-congruent psychotic features Delusions or hallucinations whose content is en-
tirely consistent with the typi cal themes of a depressed or manic mood. If the mood is
depressed, the content of the delusions or hallucinations would involve themes of per-
sonal inadequacy, guilt, disease, death, ni hilism, or deserved punishment. The content
of the delusion may include themes of persec ution if these are based on self-derogatory
concepts such as deserved puni shment. If the mood is manic,  the content of the delusions
or hallucinations would involve themes of in flated worth, power, knowledge, or iden-
tity, or a special relationship to a deity or a famous person. The content of the delusion
may include themes of persecution if thes e are based on concepts such as inflated
worth or deserved punishment.
mood-incongruent psychotic features Delusions or hallucinations whose content is not
consistent with the typical themes of a depr essed or manic mood. In the case of depres-
sion, the delusions or hallucinations would not involve themes of personal inadequacy,
guilt, disease, death, nihilism,  or deserved punishment. In the case of mania, the delu-
sions or hallucinations would not involve themes of inflated worth, power, knowledge,
or identity, or a special relationsh ip to a deity or a famous person.
multiple sleep latency test Polysomnographic assessment of the sleep-onset period,
with several short sleep-wake cycles assessed during a single session. The test repeat-
edly measures the time to daytime sleep on set (“sleep latency”) and occurrence of and
time to onset of the rapid eye movement sleep phase.
mutism No, or very little, verbal response  (in the absence of known aphasia).
narcolepsy Sleep disorder characterized by period s of extreme drowsi ness and frequent
daytime lapses into sleep (sleep attacks). Th ese must have been occurring at least three
times per week over the last 3 mont hs (in the absence of treatment).
negative affectivity Frequent and intense experiences of  high levels of a wide range of
negative emotions (e.g., anxiety, depressio n, guilt/shame, worry, anger), and their be-
havioral (e.g., self-harm) and interpersonal (e.g., depe ndency) manifestations. Nega-
tive Affectivity is one of the five pathological PERSONALITY  TRAIT  DOMAINS  defined in
Section III “Alternative DSM-5 Mo del for Personality Disorders.”
negativism Opposition to suggestion or advice; be havior opposite to that appropriate to
a specific situation or against the wishes of others, including direct resistance to efforts
to be moved.
night eating syndrome Recurrent episodes of night eating, as manifested by eating after
awakening from sleep or ex cessive food consumption afte r the evening meal. There is
awareness and recall of the eating. The night eating is not better accounted for by ex-
ternal influences such as changes in the in dividual’s sleep-wake cycle or by local social
norms.
nightmare disorder Repeated occurrences of extended, extremely dysphoric, and well-
remembered dreams that usually involve effo rts to avoid threats to survival, security
or physical integrity and that generally occu r during the second half of the major sleep
episode. On awakening from the dysphoric dreams, the individual rapidly becomes
oriented and alert.
nonsubstance addiction(s) Behavioral disorder (also called behavioral addiction) not re-
lated to any substance of abuse that shar es some features with substance-induced
addiction.
826 Glossary of Technical Terms
obsession Recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges,  or images that are experienced, at
some time during the disturbance, as intru sive and unwanted and that in most individ-
uals cause marked anxiety or distress. The individual attempts to  ignore or suppress
such thoughts, urges, or images, or to neutralize them with some other thought or ac-
tion (i.e., by performing a compulsion).
overeating Eating too much food too quickly.
overvalued idea An unreasonable and sustained belief that is maintained with less than
delusional intensity (i.e., the person is able to acknowledge the possibility that the be-
lief may not be true). The belief is not one th at is ordinarily accept ed by other members
of the person’s culture or subculture.
panic attacks Discrete periods of sudden onset of in tense fear or terror, often associated
with feelings of impending doom. During these attacks there are symptoms such as
shortness of breath or smothering sensations; palpitations, pounding heart, or acceler-
ated heart rate; chest pain or  discomfort; choking; and fear of going crazy or losing con-
trol. Panic attacks may be unexpected, in wh ich the onset of the attack is not associated
with an obvious trigger and instead occurs “ out of the blue,” or expected, in which the
panic attack is associated with an obvious trigger, either internal or external.
paranoid ideation Ideation, of less than delusional proportions, involving suspicious-
ness or the belief that one is being hara ssed, persecuted, or  unfairly treated.
parasomnias Disorders of sleep involv ing abnormal behaviors or physiological events
occurring during sleep or sleep-wake transitions. Compare with DYSSOMNIAS .
perseveration Persistence at tasks or in particular way of doing things long after the be-
havior has ceased to be functional or effe ctive; continuance of the same behavior de-
spite repeated failures or clear reasons fo r stopping. Perseveration is a facet of the
broad personality trait domain N EGATIVE  AFFECTIVITY .
personality Enduring patterns of perceiving, relating to, and thinking about the envi-
ronment and oneself. P ERSONALITY  TRAITS  are prominent aspects of personality that are
exhibited in relatively consist ent ways across time and across situations. Personality
traits influence self and interpersonal func tioning. Depending on their severity, im-
pairments in personality functioning and personality trait expression may reflect the
presence of a personality disorder.
personality disord er—trait specified In Section III “Alternative DSM-5 Model for Per-
sonality Disorders,” a proposed diagnostic category for use when a personality disor-
der is considered present but the criteria for a specific disorder ar e not met. Personality
disorder—trait specified (PD-TS) is defined by significant impairment in personality
functioning, as measured by the Level of Personality Functioning Scale and one or
more pathological PERSONALITY  TRAIT  DOMAINS  or PERSONALITY  TRAIT  FACETS . PD-TS is
proposed in DSM-5 Section III for further st udy as a possible future replacement for
other specified personality disorder and unspecified personality disorder.
personality functioning Cognitive models of self and othe rs that shape patterns of emo-
tional and affiliative engagement.
personality trait A tendency to behave, feel, perceive , and think in relatively consistent
ways across time and across situations in which the trait may be manifest.
personality trait facets Specific personality components that make up the five broad per-
sonality trait domains in the dimensional ta xonomy of Section II I “Alternative DSM-5
Model for Personality Disorders.” For exampl e, the broad domain antagonism has the
following component facets: MANIPULATIVENESS , DECEITFULNESS , GRANDIOSITY , ATTEN -
TION  SEEKING , CALLOUSNESS , and HOSTILITY .
Glossary of Technical Terms 827
personality trait domains In the dimensional taxonomy of Section III “Alternative DSM-
5 Model for Personality Disorders,” personalit y traits are organized into five broad do-
mains: N EGATIVE  AFFECTIVITY , DETACHMENT , ANTAGONISM , DISINHIBITION , and P SY-
CHOTICISM . Within these five broad trait domains are 25 specific personality trait facets
(e.g., IMPULSIVITY , RIGID  PERFECTIONISM ).
phobia A persistent fear of a specific object, ac tivity, or situation (i.e., the phobic stimu-
lus) out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the specific object or situation that
results in a compelling desire to avoid it. If  it cannot be avoided, the phobic stimulus is
endured with marked distress.
pica Persistent eating of nonnutritive nonfood substances over a period of at least 1 month.
The eating of nonnutritive nonfood substances is inapprop riate to the developmental
level of the individual (a minimum age of 2 years is suggested fo r diagnosis). The eat-
ing behavior is not part of a culturally supported or socially  normative practice.
polysomnography Polysomnography (PSG), also known as a sleep study, is a multipa-
rametric test used in the study of sleep and as a diagnostic tool in sleep medicine. The
test result is called a polysomnogram,  also abbreviated PSG. PSG monitors many body
functions, including brain (electroencepha lography), eye movements (electro-oculog-
raphy), muscle activity or skeletal muscle  activation (electromyography), and heart
rhythm (electrocardiography).
posturing Spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against gravity (as seen in
CATATONIA ). Abnormal posturing may also be a si gn of certain injuries to the brain or
spinal cord, including the following:
decerebrate posture The arms and legs are out straight and rigid, the toes point
downward, and the head is arched backward.
decorticate posture The body is rigid, the arms are stiff and bent, the fists are tight,
and the legs are straight out.
opisthotonus The back is rigid and arching, and the head is thrown backward.
An affected person may alternate between different postures as the condition changes.
pressured speech Speech that is increased in amount, a ccelerated, and difficult or impossi-
ble to interrupt. Usually it is also loud an d emphatic. Frequently th e person talks without
any social stimulation and may continue to talk even though no one is listening.
prodrome An early or premonitory sign or symptom of a disorder.
pseudocyesis A false belief of being pregnant that is associated with objective signs and
reported symptoms of pregnancy.
psychological distress A range of symptoms and experien ces of a person’s internal life
that are commonly held to be troubling, confusing, or out of the ordinary.
psychometric measures Standardized instruments such as scales, questionnaires, tests,
and assessments that are designed to measu re human knowledge, abilities, attitudes,
or personality traits.
psychomotor agitation Excessive motor activity associated with a feeling of inner tension.
The activity is usually nonproductive and repetitious and consists of behaviors such as pac-
ing, fidgeting, wringing of the hands, pu lling of clothes, and inability to sit still.
psychomotor retardation Visible generalized slowing of movements and speech.
psychotic features Features characterized by delusions,  hallucinations, and formal thought
disorder.
psychoticism Exhibiting a wide range of culturally  incongruent odd, eccentric, or un-
usual behaviors and cognitions, including both  process (e.g., perception, dissociation)
828 Glossary of Technical Terms
and content (e.g., beliefs). Psychoticism is one of the five broad PERSONALITY  TRAIT  DO-
MAINS  defined in Section III “Alternative DSM-5 Model for Pers onality Disorders.”
purging disorder Eating disorder characterized by re current purging behavior to influ-
ence weight or shape, such as self-induced vomiting, misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or
other medications, in the absence of binge eating.
racing thoughts A state in which the mind uncontrollably brings up random thoughts
and memories and switches between them ve ry quickly. Sometimes the thoughts are
related, with one thought leading to anothe r; other times they are completely random.
A person experiencing an episode of racing thoughts has no cont rol over them and is
unable to focus on a single topic or to sleep.
rapid cycling Term referring to bipolar disorder char acterized by the presence of at least
four mood episodes in the previous 12 months  that meet the criteria for a manic, hypo-
manic, or major depressive episode. Episodes are demarcated either by partial or full
remissions of at least 2 months or by a sw itch to an episode of the opposite polarity
(e.g., major depressive episode to manic epis ode). The rapid cycling specifier can be ap-
plied to bipolar I or bipolar II disorder.
rapid eye movement (REM) A behavioral sign of the phase of sleep during which the
sleeper is likely to be experiencing dreamlike mental activity.
repetitive speech Morphologically heterogeneous iterations of speech.
residual phase Period after an episode of schizophren ia that has partly or completed re-
mitted but in which some symptoms may remain, and symptoms such as listlessness,
problems with concentrating, and withdrawal  from social activities may predominate.
restless legs syndrome An urge to move the legs, usually accompanied or caused by
uncomfortable and unpleasant sensations in the legs (for pediatric restless legs syn-
drome, the description of these symptoms should be in the child’s own words). The
symptoms begin or worsen during periods of  rest or inactivity. Symptoms are partially
or totally relieved by movement. Symptoms are worse in the evening or at night than
during the day or occur only in the night/evening.
restricted affectivity Little reaction to emotionally arousing situations; constricted
emotional experience and expression; indiffer ence and aloofness in normatively engaging
situations. Restricted affectivity is a facet of the broad personality trait domain D ETACH -
MENT .
rigid perfectionism Rigid insistence on everything being flawless, perfect, and without
errors or faults, including one’s own and ot hers’ performance; sacrificing of timeliness
to ensure correctness in every detail; believi ng that there is only one right way to do
things; difficulty changing ideas and/or viewpoint; preo ccupation with details, orga-
nization, and order. Lack of rigid perfection ism is a facet of the broad personality trait
domain D ISINHIBITION .
risk taking Engagement in dangerous, risky, and po tentially self-damaging activities, un-
necessarily and without regard to consequences; lack of concern for one’s limitations and
denial of the reality of  personal danger; reck less pursuit of goals regardless of the level of
risk involved. Risk taking is a facet of the broad personality trait domain D ISINHIBITION .
rumination (rumination disorders) Repeated regurgitation of food over a period of at
least 1 month. Regurgitated food may be re-chewed, re-s wallowed, or spit out. In
rumination disorders, there is no evidence that an associated gastrointestinal or an-
other medical condition (e.g., gastroesophage al reflux) is sufficient  to account for the
repeated regurgitation.
Glossary of Technical Terms 829
seasonal pattern A pattern of the occurrence of a sp ecific mental disorder in selected
seasons of the year.
self-directedness, self-direction Pursuit of coherent and meaningful short-term and life
goals; utilization of constructive and prosocial internal standards of behavior; ability to
self-reflect productively.
separation insecurity Fears of being alone due to rejection by and/or separation from
significant others, based in a lack of confidence in one’s ability to care for oneself, both
physically and emotionally. Separation insecu rity is a facet of the broad personality
trait domain N EGATIVE  AFFECTIVITY . 
sex Biological indication of male and female (understood in the context of reproductive
capacity), such as sex chromosomes, gona ds, sex hormones, and nonambiguous inter-
nal and external genitalia.
sign An objective manifestation of a pathological condition. Signs are observed by the
examiner rather than reported by th e affected individual. Compare with SYMPTOM .
sleep-onset REM Occurrence of the rapid eye movement (REM) phase of sleep within
minutes after falling asleep. Usually assessed by a polysomnographic MULTIPLE  SLEEP
LATENCY  TEST .
sleep terrors Recurrent episodes of abrupt terror ar ousals from sleep, usually occurring
during the first third of the major sleep episode and beginning with a panicky scream.
There is intense fear and signs of autonomi c arousal, such as mydriasis, tachycardia,
rapid breathing, and sweating, during each episode.
sleepwalking Repeated episodes of rising from bed during sleep and walking about,
usually occurring during the first third of the major sleep episode. While sleepwalking,
the person has a blank, staring face, is relati vely unresponsive to the efforts of others to
communicate with him or her, and can be  awakened only with great difficulty.
somnolence (or “drowsiness”) A state of near-sleep, a strong  desire for sleep, or sleep-
ing for unusually long periods. It has two di stinct meanings, referring both to the usual
state preceding falling asleep and to the chro nic condition that involves being in that
state independent of a circadian rhythm. Compare with HYPERSOMNIA .
specific food cravings Irresistible desire for sp ecial types of food.
startle response (or “startle reaction”) An involuntary (reflexive) reaction to a sudden
unexpected stimulus, such as a loud noise or sharp movement.
stereotypies, stereotyped behaviors/movements Repetitive, abnorma lly frequent, non-
goal-directed movements, seemingly driven , and nonfunctional motor behavior (e.g.,
hand shaking or waving, body rock ing, head banging, self-biting).
stress The pattern of specific and nonspecifi c responses a person makes to stimulus
events that disturb his or he r equilibrium and tax or exceed  his or her ability to cope.
stressor Any emotional, physical, social, economic, or other factor that disrupts the nor-
mal physiological, cognitive, emotional, or  behavioral balance of an individual.
stressor, psychological Any life event or life change that may be associated temporally
(and perhaps causally) with the onset, occurr ence, or exacerbation of a mental disorder.
stupor Lack of psychomotor activity , which may range from not actively relating to the
environment to complete immobility.
submissiveness Adaptation of one’s behavior to the actual or perceived interests and
desires of others even when doing so is antithetical to one’s own interests, needs, or
desires. Submissiveness is a facet of the broad personality trait domain N EGATIVE  AF-
FECTIVITY . 
830 Glossary of Technical Terms
subsyndromal Below a specified level or threshold required to qualif y for a particular
condition. Subsyndromal conditions ( formes frustes) are medical condit ions that do not
meet full criteria for a diag nosis—for example, because the symptoms are fewer or less
severe than a defined syndrome—but that nevertheless can be identified and related to
the “full-blown” syndrome.
suicidal ideas (suicidal ideation) Thoughts about self-harm, with deliberate consider-
ation or planning of possible techniques of causing one’s own death.
suicide The act of intentionally causing one’s own death.
suicide attempt An attempt to end one’s own life,  which may lead to one’s death.
suspiciousness Expectations of—and sensitivity to— signs of interpersonal ill intent or
harm; doubts about loyalty and fidelity of ot hers; feelings of being mistreated, used,
and/or persecuted by others. Suspiciousness is a facet of the broad personality trait do-
main D ETACHMENT .
symptom A subjective manifestation of a pathological condition. Symptoms are reported
by the affected individual rather than observed by the examiner. Compare with SIGN .
syndrome A grouping of signs and symptoms, ba sed on their frequent co-occurrence
that may suggest a common underlying pathog enesis, course, familia l pattern, or treat-
ment selection.
synesthesias A condition in which stimulation of  one sensory or cognitive pathway
leads to automatic, involunt ary experiences in a second sensory or cognitive pathway.
temper outburst An emotional outburst (also calle d a “tantrum”), usually associated
with children or those in emotional distress, and typically characterized by stubborn-
ness, crying, screaming, defiance, angry rant ing, a resistance to attempts at pacifica-
tion, and in some cases hitting. Physical co ntrol may be lost, the person may be unable
to remain still, and even if the “goal” of th e person is met, he or she may not be calmed.
thought-action fusion The tendency to treat thoughts and actions as equivalent.
tic An involuntary, sudden, ra pid, recurrent, nonrhythmic motor movement or vocal-
ization.
tolerance A situation that occurs with continued use of a drug in which an individual
requires greater dosages to achieve the same effect.
transgender The broad spectrum of individuals wh o transiently or permanently identify
with a gender different from their natal gender.
transsexual An individual who seeks, or has undergone, a social transition from male to
female or female to male, which in many, but not all cases may also involve a somatic
transition by cross- sex hormone treatment and geni tal surgery (“sex reassignment
surgery”).
traumatic stressor Any event (or events) that may cause or threaten death, serious injury,
or sexual violence to an individual, a close family member, or a close friend.
unusual beliefs and experiences Belief that one has unusual abilities, such as mind
reading, telekinesis, or THOUGHT -ACTION  FUSION ; unusual experiences of reality, in-
cluding hallucinatory experiences. In genera l, the unusual beliefs are not held at the
same level of conviction as DELUSIONS . Unusual beliefs and experiences are a facet of
the personality trait domain P SYCHOTICISM .
waxy flexibility Slight, even resistance to positio ning by examiner. Compare with CAT-
ALEPSY .
Glossary of Technical Terms 831
withdrawal, social Preference for being alone to being with others; reticence in social
situations; AVOIDANCE  of social contacts and activity; lack of initiation of social contact.
Social withdrawal is a facet of th e broad personality trait domain D ETACHMENT .
worry Unpleasant or uncomfortable thoughts th at cannot be consci ously controlled by
trying to turn the attention to other subjects. The worrying  is often persistent, repeti-
tive, and out of proportion to the topic worr ied about (it can even be about a triviality).
This page intentionally left blank 
833 Glossary of Cultural
Concepts of Distress
Ataque de nervios
Ataque de nervios  (“attack of nerves”) is a syndrome among individuals of Latino descent,
characterized by symptoms of intense emotio nal upset, including acut e anxiety, anger, or
grief; screaming and shouting uncontrollably; a ttacks of crying; tremblin g; heat in the chest
rising into the head; and becomi ng verbally and physically ag gressive. Dissociative experi-
ences (e.g., depersonalization, derealization, am nesia), seizure-like or fainting episodes, and
suicidal gestures are prominent in some ataques  but absent in others. A general feature of an
ataque de nervios  is a sense of being out of control. Attacks frequently occur as a direct result
of a stressful event relating to the family, such as news of the death of a close relative, con-
flicts with a spouse or childr en, or witnessing an accident involving a family member. For a
minority of individuals, no partic ular social event triggers their ataques;  instead, their vul-
nerability to losing control comes from the accumulated experience of suffering.
No one-to-one relationship  has been found between ataque  and any specific psychiatric dis-
order, although several disorders, including pani c disorder, other specif ied or unspecified dis-
sociative disorder, and conversion diso rder, have symptomatic overlap with ataque .
In community samples, ataque  is associated with suicidal  ideation, disability, and out-
patient psychiatric utilization, after adjustment for psychiatric diagnoses, traumatic expo-
sure, and other covariates. However, some ataques represent normative expressions of
acute distress (e.g., at a funeral) without clinical sequelae. The term ataque de nervios  may
also refer to an idiom of distress that includ es any “fit”-like paroxysm  of emotionality (e.g.,
hysterical laughing) and may be used to indica te an episode of loss of control in response
to an intense stressor.
Related conditions in other cultural contexts:  Indisposition in Haiti, blacking out in
the Southern United States, and falling out in the West Indies.
Related conditions in DSM-5:  Panic attack, panic disorder, other specified or unspec-
ified dissociative disorder, co nversion (functional neurologic symptom) disorder, inter-
mittent explosive disorder, other specified or unspecified anxiety disorder, other specified
or unspecified trauma and stressor-related disorder.
Dhat syndrome
Dhat syndrome  is a term that was coined in South Asia  little more than half a century ago to
account for common clinical presentations of young male patients who attributed their
various symptoms to semen loss. Despite the name, it is not a discrete syndrome but rather
a cultural explanation of distress for patients  who refer to diverse symptoms, such as anx-
iety, fatigue, weakness, weight loss, impotence, other multiple somatic complaints, and
depressive mood. The cardinal feature is an xiety and distress about the loss of dhat in the
absence of any identifiable physiological dysfunction. Dhat  was identified by patients as
a white discharge that was noted on defecation  or urination. Ideas about this substance
are related to the concept of dhatu  (semen) described in the Hindu system of medicine,
Ayurveda, as one of seven essential bodily fluids whose balance is necessary to maintain
health.
834 Glossary of Cultural Concepts of Distress
Although dhat syndrome  was formulated as a cultural guide to local clinical practice, related
ideas about the harmful effects of  semen loss have been shown to be widespread in the general
population, suggesting a cultural disposition for explaining health problems and symptoms
with reference to dhat syndrome.  Research in health care settings has yielded diverse estimates
of the syndrome’s prevalence (e .g., 64% of men attending psychiatric clinics in India for sexual
complaints; 30% of men attending general medical clinics in Pakistan). Although dhat syndrome
is most commonly identified with young men from lower socioeconomic backgrounds, mid-
dle-aged men may also be affe cted. Comparable concerns about white vaginal discharge (leu-
korrhea) have been associated with a variant of the concept for women.
Related conditions in other cultural contexts:  koro in Southeast Asia, particularly Sin-
gapore and shen-k’uei  (“kidney deficiency”) in China.
Related conditions in DSM-5:  Major depressive disorder, persistent depressive disor-
der (dysthymia), generalized anxiety disorder, somatic symptom disorder, illness anxiety
disorder, erectile disorder, early (premature) ejaculation, other specified or unspecified
sexual dysfunction, academic problem.
Khyâl cap
“Khyâl  attacks” ( khyâl cap ), or “wind attacks,” is a synd rome found among Cambodians in
the United States and Cambodia. Common symptoms include those of panic attacks, such
as dizziness, palpitations, shortness of breath, and cold extremities, as well as other symp-
toms of anxiety and auto nomic arousal (e.g., tinnitus and neck soreness). Khyâl  attacks in-
clude catastrophic cognitions centered on the concern that khyâl  (a windlike substance)
may rise in the body—along wi th blood—and cause a range of  serious effects (e.g., com-
pressing the lungs to cause shortness of breath and asphyxia; entering the cranium to
cause tinnitus, dizziness, blurry vision, and a fatal syncope). Khyâl attacks may occur with-
out warning, but are frequently brought abou t by triggers such as  worrisome thoughts,
standing up (i.e., orthostasis), specific odor s with negative associations, and agoraphobic-
type cues like going to crowded spaces or riding in a car. Khyâl  attacks usually meet panic
attack criteria and may shape the experience  of other anxiety and trauma- and stressor-
related disorders. Khyâl attacks may be associated with considerable disability.
Related conditions in other cultural contexts:  Laos ( pen lom), Tibet ( srog rlung gi nad ),
Sri Lanka ( vata), and Korea (hwa byung ).
Related conditions in DSM-5:  Panic attack, panic disorder, generalized anxiety disor-
der, agoraphobia, posttraumatic stre ss disorder, illness anxiety disorder.
Kufungisisa
Kufungisisa  (“thinking too much” in Shona) is an id iom of distress and a cultural explana-
tion among the Shona of Zimbabwe . As an explanation, it is considered to be causative of
anxiety, depression, and somatic problems (e .g., “my heart is painful because I think too
much”). As an idiom of psychosocial distress, it is indicative of interpersonal and social
difficulties (e.g., marital problems, having no money to take care of children). Kufungisisa
involves ruminating on upsettin g thoughts, particularly worries.
Kufungisisa is associated with a range of psychopathology, including anxiety symp-
toms, excessive worry, panic atta cks, depressive symptoms, and ir ritability. In a study of a
random community sample, two-thirds of the cases identified by a general psychopathol-
ogy measure were of this complaint.
In many cultures, “thinking too much” is considered to be damaging to the mind and
body and to cause specific symptoms like headache and dizziness. “Thinking too much”
may also be a key component of cultural syndromes such as “brain fag” in Nigeria. In the
case of brain fag, “thinking too much” is primarily attributed  to excessive study, which is
considered to damage the brain in particular, with symptoms including feelings of heat or
crawling sensations in the head.
Glossary of Cultural Concepts of Distress 835
Related conditions in other cultural contexts:  “Thinking too much ” is a common id-
iom of distress and cultural explanation acro ss many countries and ethnic groups. It has
been described in Africa, th e Caribbean and Latin America, and among East Asian and
Native American groups.
Related conditions in DSM-5:  Major depressive disorder, pe rsistent depressive disorder
(dysthymia), generalized anxiety disorder, pos ttraumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compul-
sive disorder, persistent complex bereavement disorder (see “Conditions for Further Study”).
Maladi moun
Maladi moun  (literally “humanly caused illness,” also referred to as “sent sickness”) is a
cultural explanation in Haitian communitie s for diverse medical and psychiatric disor-
ders. In this explanatory mode l, interpersonal envy and malice cause people to harm their
enemies by sending illnesses such as psychosis,  depression, social or academic failure, and
inability to perform activities  of daily living. The etiological model assumes that illness
may be caused by others’ envy and hatred, pr ovoked by the victim’s economic success as
evidenced by a new job or expensive purchase . One person’s gain is assumed to produce
another person’s loss, so visible success make s one vulnerable to attack. Assigning the la-
bel of sent sickness depends on mode of on set and social status more than presenting
symptoms. The acute onset of new symptoms or  an abrupt behavioral  change raises sus-
picions of a spiritual attack. Someone who is at tractive, intelligent, or wealthy is perceived
as especially vulnerable, and even young healthy children are at risk.
Related conditions in other cultural contexts:  Concerns about illness (typically, phys-
ical illness) caused by envy or social co nflict are common across cultures and often ex-
pressed in the form of “evil eye” (e.g. in Spanish, mal de ojo,  in Italian, mal’occhiu).
Related conditions in DSM-5:  Delusional disorder, persecutory type; schizophrenia
with paranoid features.
Nervios
Nervios  (“nerves”) is a common idiom of distress among Latinos in the United States and
Latin America. Nervios  refers to a general state of vulne rability to stressful life experiences
and to difficult life circumstances. The term nervios  includes a wide range of symptoms of
emotional distress, somatic disturbance, an d inability to function. The most common
symptoms attributed to nervios  include headaches and “brain aches” (occipital neck ten-
sion), irritability, stomach disturbances, slee p difficulties, nervousness, easy tearfulness,
inability to concentrat e, trembling, tingling sensations, and mareos  (dizziness with occa-
sional vertigo-like exacerbations). Nervios  is a broad idiom of distress that spans the range
of severity from cases with no mental diso rder to presentations resembling adjustment,
anxiety, depressive, dissociative, somatic symptom, or psychotic disorders. “Being ner-
vous since childhood” appears to  be more of a trait and may precede social anxiety disor-
der, while “being ill with nerves” is more related than other forms of nervios  to psychiatric
problems, especially dissociation and depression.
Related conditions in other cultural contexts: Nevra  among Greeks in North America,
nierbi  among Sicilians in North America, and nerves  among whites in Appalachia and
Newfoundland.
Related conditions in DSM-5: Major depressive disorder, peristent depressive disor-
der (dysthymia), generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety disorder, other specified or
unspecified dissociative disorder, soma tic symptom disorder, schizophrenia.
Shenjing shuairuo
Shenjing shuairuo  (“weakness of the nervous system” in  Mandarin Chines e) is a cultural
syndrome that integrates conceptual categori es of traditional Chinese medicine with the
836 Glossary of Cultural Concepts of Distress
Western diagnosis of neurasthenia. In the second, revised edition of the Chinese Classifica-
tion of Mental Disorders  (CCMD-2-R), shenjing shuairuo is defined as a syndrome composed
of three out of five nonhierarchical symptom clusters: weak ness (e.g., mental fatigue),
emotions (e.g., feeling vexed), excitement (e.g.,  increased recollections), nervous pain (e.g.,
headache), and sleep (e.g., insomnia). Fan nao  (feeling vexed) is a form  of irritability mixed
with worry and distress over conflicting thoug hts and unfulfilled desires. The third edi-
tion of the CCMD retains shenjing shuairuo  as a somatoform diagno sis of exclusion. Salient
precipitants of shenjing shuairuo  include work- or family-rel ated stressors, loss of face
(mianzi, lianzi ), and an acute sense of failure (e.g., in academic performance). Shenjing sh-
uairuo  is related to traditional concepts of weakness ( xu) and health imbalances related to
deficiencies of a vital essence (e.g., the depletion of qi [vital energy] following overstrain-
ing or stagnation of qi due to excessive worry). In the traditional interpretation, shenjing
shuairuo  results when bodily channels ( jing) conveying vital forces ( shen) become dysreg-
ulated as a result of various social and interpersonal stressors, such as the inability to
change a chronically frustrating and distressi ng situation. Various psychiatric disorders
are associated with shenjing shuairuo,  notably mood, anxiety, and somatic symptom disor-
ders. In medical clinics in China, however, up to 45% of patients with shenjing shuairuo  do
not meet criteria for any DSM-IV disorder.
Related conditions in ot her cultural contexts:  Neurasthenia-spectrum idioms and
syndromes are present in India ( ashaktapanna ) and Japan ( shinkei-suijaku ), among other set-
tings. Other conditions, such as brain fag syndrome, burnout syndrome, and chronic fa-
tigue syndrome, are also closely related.
Related conditions in DSM-5:  Major depressive disorder, persistent depressive disor-
der (dysthymia), generalized anxiety disorder, somatic symp tom disorder, social anxiety
disorder, specific phobia, po sttraumatic stress disorder.
Susto
Susto  (“fright”) is a cultural explanation fo r distress and misfortune prevalent among
some Latinos in the United States and amon g people in Mexico, Central America, and
South America. It is no t recognized as an illness catego ry among Latinos from the Carib-
bean. Susto  is an illness attributed to a frightenin g event that causes the soul to leave the
body and results in unhappiness and sickness, as well as difficulties functioning in key
social roles. Symptoms may appear any time from days to years after the fright is experi-
enced. In extreme cases, susto  may result in death. There are no specific defining symp-
toms for susto; however, symptoms that are often reported by people with susto  include
appetite disturbances, inadequa te or excessive sleep, troubled sleep or dreams, feelings of
sadness, low self-worth or dirtiness, interperso nal sensitivity, and lack of motivation to do
anything. Somatic symptoms accompanying susto may include muscle aches and pains,
cold in the extremities, pallo r, headache, stomachache, and diarrhea. Precipitating events
are diverse, and include natural phenomena, an imals, interpersonal situations, and super-
natural agents, among others.
Three syndromic types of susto  (referred to as cibih  in the local Zapotec language) have
been identified, each ha ving different relationships with psychiatric diagnoses. An interper-
sonal susto  characterized by feelings of loss, aban donment, and not being loved by family,
with accompanying symptoms of sadness, poor  self-image, and suicidal ideation, seemed to
be closely related to major depressive disorder. When susto  resulted from a traumatic event
that played a major role in shaping symptoms and in emotional processing of the experience,
the diagnosis of posttrauma tic stress disorder appe ared more appropriate. Susto  character-
ized by various recurrent somatic symptoms—for  which the person sought health care from
several practitioners—was thought to resemble a somatic symptom disorder.
Related conditions in other cultural contexts:  Similar etiological concepts and symp-
tom configurations are found globally. In the Andean region, susto  is referred to as espanto .
Glossary of Cultural Concepts of Distress 837
Related conditions in DSM-5:  Major depressive disorder, posttraumatic stress disor-
der, other specified or unspecified trauma and stressor-related di sorder, somatic symp-
tom disorders.
Taijin kyofusho
Taijin kyofusho  (“interpersonal fear disorder” in Japa nese) is a cultural syndrome charac-
terized by anxiety about and av oidance of interpersonal situations due to the thought, feel-
ing, or conviction that one’s appearance and actions in social interactions are inadequate
or offensive to others. In the United States, the variant involves having an offensive body
odor and is termed olfactory reference syndrome.  Individuals with taijin kyofusho  tend to focus
on the impact of their symptoms and behavior s on others. Variants include major concerns
about facial blushing (erythrophobia), having an offensive body odor (olfactory reference
syndrome), inappropriate gaze (too much or too little eye co ntact), stiff or awkward facial
expression or bodily moveme nts (e.g., stiffening, trem bling), or body deformity.
Taijin kyofusho  is a broader construct than social an xiety disorder in DSM-5. In addition
to performance anxiety, taijin kyofusho  includes two culture-relate d forms: a “sensitive type,”
with extreme social sensitivity and anxiety about interpersonal inte ractions, and an “of-
fensive type,” in which the major concer n is offending others. As a category, taijin kyofusho
thus includes syndromes with features of body dysmorphic disorder as well as delusional
disorder. Concerns may have a delusional qualit y, responding poorly to simple reassurance
or counterexample.
The distinctive symptoms of taijin kyofusho  occur in specific cultural contexts and, to
some extent, with more severe social anxiet y across cultures. Simila r syndromes are found
in Korea and other societies that place a st rong emphasis on the self-conscious mainte-
nance of appropriate social behavior in hierarchical interpersonal relationships. Taijin kyo-
fusho –like symptoms have also b een described in other cultural contexts, including the
United States, Australia, and New Zealand.
Related conditions in other cultural contexts:  Taein kong po  in Korea.
Related conditions in DSM-5:  Social anxiety disorder, bo dy dysmorphic disorder, de-
lusional disorder, obsessive-co mpulsive disorder, olfactory re ference syndrome (a type of
other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder ). Olfactory reference syndrome
is related specifically to the jikoshu-kyofu variant of taijin kyofusho,  whose core symptom is
the concern that the person emits an offensive body odor. This presentation is seen in var-
ious cultures outside Japan.
This page intentionally left blank 
839Alphabetical Listing of
DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes
(ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
ICD-9-CM codes are to be used for coding  purposes in the United States through 
September 30, 2014. ICD-10-CM codes are to be used starting October 1, 2014.
ICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
V62.3 Z55.9 Academic or educational problem
V62.4 Z60.3 Acculturation difficulty
308.3 F43.0 Acute stress disorder 
    Adjustment disorders
309.24 F43.22 With anxiety
309.0 F43.21 With depressed mood
309.3 F43.24 With disturbance of conduct
309.28 F43.23 With mixed anxiety and depressed mood
309.4 F43.25 With mixed disturbanc e of emotions and conduct
309.9 F43.20 Unspecified
V71.01 Z72.811 Adult an tisocial behavior
307.0 F98.5 Adult-onset  fluency disorder
    Adult physical abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Confirmed
995.81 T74.11XA Initial encounter
995.81 T74.11XD Subsequent encounter
    Adult physical abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Suspected
995.81 T76.11XA Initial encounter
995.81 T76.11XD Subsequent encounter
    Adult psychological abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, 
Confirmed
995.82 T74.31XA Initial encounter
995.82 T74.31XD Subsequent encounter
    Adult psychological abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Suspected
995.82 T76.31XA Initial encounter
995.82 T76.31XD Subsequent encounter
    Adult sexual abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Confirmed
995.83 T74.21XA Initial encounter
995.83 T74.21XD Subsequent encounter
    Adult sexual abuse by nonspo use or nonpartner, Suspected
995.83 T76.21XA Initial encounter
995.83 T76.21XD Subsequent encounter
840 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
300.22 F40.00 Agoraphobia
291.89   Alcohol-induced  anxiety disorder
  F10.180 With mild use disorder
  F10.280 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F10.980 Without use disorder
291.89   Alcohol-induced bipo lar and related disorder
  F10.14 With mild use disorder
  F10.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F10.94 Without use disorder
291.89   Alcohol-induced depressive disorder
  F10.14 With mild use disorder
  F10.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F10.94 Without use disorder
291.1   Alcohol-induced major neuroc ognitive disorder, Amnestic 
confabulatory type
  F10.26 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F10.96 Without use disorder
291.2   Alcohol-induced major neuroc ognitive disorder, Nonamnestic 
confabulatory type
  F10.27 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F10.97 Without use disorder
291.89   Alcohol-induced mild  neurocogniti ve disorder
  F10.288 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F10.988 Without use disorder
291.9   Alcohol-induced psychotic disorder
  F10.159 With mild use disorder
  F10.259 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F10.959 Without use disorder
291.89   Alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction
  F10.181 With mild use disorder
  F10.281 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F10.981 Without use disorder
291.82   Alcohol-induc ed sleep disorder
  F10.182 With mild use disorder
  F10.282 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F10.982 Without use disorder
303.00   Alcohol intoxication
  F10.129 With mild use disorder
  F10.229 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F10.929 Without use disorder
291.0   Alcohol intoxication delirium
  F10.121 With mild use disorder
  F10.221 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F10.921 Without use disorderICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) 841
    Alcohol use disorder
305.00 F10.10 Mild
303.90 F10.20 Moderate
303.90 F10.20 Severe
291.81   Alcohol withdrawal
  F10.232 With perceptual disturbances
  F10.239 Without perceptual disturbances
291.0 F10.231 Alcohol withdrawal delirium
292.89   Amphetamine (or other stim ulant)–induced anxiety disorder
  F15.180 With mild use disorder
  F15.280 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.980 Without use disorder
292.84   Amphetamine (or other stimul ant)–induced bipolar and related 
disorder
  F15.14 With mild use disorder
  F15.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.94 Without use disorder
  F15.921 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced delirium
292.84   Amphetamine (or other stimul ant)–induced depressive disorder
  F15.14 With mild use disorder
  F15.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.94 Without use disorder
292.89   Amphetamine (or other stimulan t)–induced obsessive-compulsive 
and related disorder
  F15.188 With mild use disorder
  F15.288 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.988 Without use disorder
292.9   Amphetamine (or other stimul ant)–induced psychotic disorder
  F15.159 With mild use disorder
  F15.259 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.959 Without use disorder
292.89   Amphetamine (or other stimul ant)–induced sexual dysfunction
  F15.181 With mild use disorder
  F15.281 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.981 Without use disorder
292.85   Amphetamine (or other stim ulant)–induced sleep disorder
  F15.182 With mild use disorder
  F15.282 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.982 Without use disorder
292.89   Amphetamine or other  stimulant intoxication
  Amphetamine or other stimulant intoxication, With perceptual 
disturbances
  F15.122 With mild use disorder
  F15.222 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.922 Without use disorderICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
842 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
  Amphetamine or other stimulant intoxication, Without perceptual 
disturbances
  F15.129 With mild use disorder
  F15.229 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.929 Without use disorder
292.81   Amphetamine (or other stim ulant) intoxication delirium
  F15.121 With mild use disorder
  F15.221 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.921 Without use disorder
292.0 F15.23 Amphetamine or other stimulant withdrawal
Amphetamine-type substance use disorder
305.70 F15.10 Mild
304.40 F15.20 Moderate
304.40 F15.20 Severe
307.1 Anorexia nervosa
F50.02 Binge-eating/purging type
F50.01 Restricting type
    Antidepressant disc ontinuation syndrome
995.29 T43.205A Initial encounter
995.29 T43.205S Sequelae
995.29 T43.205D Subsequent encounter
301.7 F60.2 Antisocial personality disorder
293.84 F06.4 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition
    Attention-deficit/hy peractivity disorder
314.01 F90.2 Combined presentation
314.01 F90.1 Predominantly hyperactive/impulsive presentation
314.00 F90.0 Predominantly inattentive presentation
299.00 F84.0 Autism spectrum disorder
301.82 F60.6 Avoidant personality disorder
307.59 F50.8 Avoidant/restricti ve food intake disorder
307.51 F50.8 Binge-eating disorder
    Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode depressed 
296.56 F31.76 In full remission
296.55 F31.75 In partial remission
296.51 F31.31 Mild
296.52 F31.32 Moderate
296.53 F31.4 Severe
296.54 F31.5 With psychotic features
296.50 F31.9 Unspecified
296.40 F31.0 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode hypomanic
296.46 F31.72 In full remission
296.45 F31.71 In partial remission
296.40 F31.9 UnspecifiedICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) 843
    Bipolar I disorder, Current or  most recent episode manic
296.46 F31.74 In full remission
296.45 F31.73 In partial remission
296.41 F31.11 Mild
296.42 F31.12 Moderate
296.43 F31.13 Severe
296.44 F31.2 With psychotic features
296.40 F31.9 Unspecified
296.7 F31.9 Bipolar I disorder, Current or  most recent episode unspecified 
296.89 F31.81 Bipolar II disorder
293.83   Bipolar and related disorder  due to another medical condition
  F06.33 With manic features
  F06.33 With manic- or hypomanic-like episodes
  F06.34 With mixed features
300.7 F45.22 Body dysmorphic disorder
V62.89 R41.83 Borderline in tellectual functioning
301.83 F60.3 Borderline personality disorder
298.8 F23 Brief psyc hotic disorder
307.51 F50.2 Bulimia nervosa
292.89   Caffeine-induced anxiety disorder
  F15.180 With mild use disorder
  F15.280 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.980 Without use disorder
292.85   Caffeine-indu ced sleep disorder
  F15.182 With mild use disorder
  F15.282 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F15.982 Without use disorder
305.90 F15.929 Caffeine intoxication 
292.0 F15.93 Caffeine withdrawal 
292.89   Cannabis-induced anxiety disorder
  F12.180 With mild use disorder
  F12.280 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F12.980 Without use disorder
292.9   Cannabis-induced psychotic disorder
  F12.159 With mild use disorder
  F12.259 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F12.959 Without use disorder
292.85   Cannabis-indu ced sleep disorder
  F12.188 With mild use disorder
  F12.288 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F12.988 Without use disorder
292.89   Cannabis intoxicationICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
844 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
    Cannabis intoxication, Wi th perceptual disturbances
  F12.122 With mild use disorder
  F12.222 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F12.922 Without use disorder
   C annabis intoxication, Without percep tual disturbances
  F12.129 With mild use disorder
  F12.229 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F12.929 Without use disorder
292.81   Cannabis intoxication delirium
  F12.121 With mild use disorder
  F12.221 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F12.921 Without use disorder
    Cannabis use disorder
305.20 F12.10 Mild
304.30 F12.20 Moderate
304.30 F12.20 Severe
292.0 F12.288 Cannabis withdrawal 
293.89 F06.1 Catatonia associated with another mental disorder (catatonia 
specifier)
293.89 F06.1 Catatonic disorder due to another  medical condition
    Central sleep apnea
780.57 G47.37 Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use
786.04 R06.3 Cheyne-Stokes breathing
327.21 G47.31 Idiopathic central sleep apnea
V61.29 Z62.898 Child affected by parental relationship distress
    Child neglect, Confirmed
995.52 T74.02XA Initial encounter
995.52 T74.02XD Subsequent encounter
    Child neglect, Suspected
995.52 T76.02XA Initial encounter
995.52 T76.02XD Subsequent encounter
V71.02 Z72.810 Child or adolescent antisocial behavior
    Child physical abuse, Confirmed
995.54 T74.12XA Initial encounter
995.54 T74.12XD Subsequent encounter
    Child physical abuse, Suspected
995.54 T76.12XA Initial encounter
995.54 T76.12XD Subsequent encounter
    Child psychological abuse, Confirmed
995.51 T74.32XA Initial encounter
995.51 T74.32XD Subsequent encounter
    Child psychological abuse, Suspected
995.51 T76.32XA Initial encounter
995.51 T76.32XD Subsequent encounterICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) 845
    Child sexual abuse, Confirmed
995.53 T74.22XA Initial encounter
995.53 T74.22XD Subsequent encounter
    Child sexual abuse, Suspected
995.53 T76.22XA Initial encounter
995.53 T76.22XD Subsequent encounter
315.35 F80.81 Childhood-onset fluency disorder  (stuttering)
    Circadian rhythm sl eep-wake disorders
307.45 G47.22 Advanced sleep phase type
307.45 G47.21 Delayed sleep phase type
307.45 G47.23 Irregular sleep-wake type
307.45 G47.24 Non-24-hour sleep-wake type
307.45 G47.26 Shift work type
307.45 G47.20 Unspecified type
292.89   Cocaine-induced  anxiety disorder
  F14.180 With mild use disorder
  F14.280 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F14.980 Without use disorder
292.84   Cocaine-induced bipo lar and related disorder
  F14.14 With mild use disorder
  F14.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F14.94 Without use disorder
292.84   Cocaine-induced depressive disorder
  F14.14 With mild use disorder
  F14.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F14.94 Without use disorder
292.89   Cocaine-induced obsessive- compulsive and related disorder
  F14.188 With mild use disorder
  F14.288 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F14.988 Without use disorder
292.9   Cocaine-induced psychotic disorder
  F14.159 With mild use disorder
  F14.259 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F14.959 Without use disorder
292.89   Cocaine-induced sexual dysfunction
  F14.181 With mild use disorder
  F14.281 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F14.981 Without use disorder
292.85   Cocaine-induc ed sleep disorder
  F14.182 With mild use disorder
  F14.282 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F14.982 Without use disorderICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
846 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
292.89   Cocaine intoxication
  Cocaine intoxication, With  perceptual disturbances
  F14.122 With mild use disorder
  F14.222 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F14.922 Without use disorder
  Cocaine intoxication, With out perceptual disturbances
  F14.129 With mild use disorder
  F14.229 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F14.929 Without use disorder
292.81   Cocaine intoxication delirium
  F14.121 With mild use disorder
  F14.221 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F14.921 Without use disorder
Cocaine use disorder
305.60 F14.10 Mild
304.20 F14.20 Moderate
304.20 F14.20 Severe
292.0  F14.23 Cocaine withdrawal
   C onduct disorder
312.82 F91.2 Adolescent-onset type
312.81 F91.1 Childhood-onset type
312.89 F91.9 Unspecified onset
300.11   Conversion disorder (functional  neurological symptom disorder)
F44.4 With abnormal movement
F44.6 With anesthesia or sensory loss
F44.5 With attacks or seizures
F44.7 With mixed symptoms
F44.6 With special sensory symptoms 
F44.4 With speech symptoms 
F44.4 With swallowing symptoms
F44.4 With weakness/paralysis
V62.5 Z65.0 Conviction in civil or criminal proceedings without imprisonment
301.13 F34.0 Cyclothymic disorder 
302.74 F52.32 Delayed ejaculation
   D elirium
293.0 F05 Delirium due to an other medical condition
293.0 F05 Delirium due to multiple etiologies
292.81 Medication-induced delirium (for ICD-10-CM codes, see specific 
substances )
Substance intoxication delirium  (see specific substances for codes)
Substance withdrawal delirium (see specific subs tances for codes)
297.1 F22 Delusional disorder
301.6 F60.7 Dependent personality disorderICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) 847
300.6 F48.1 Depersonalization/derealization disorder
293.83   Depressive disorder due to another medical condition
  F06.31 With depressive features
  F06.32 With major depr essive–like episode
  F06.34 With mixed features
315.4 F82 Developmental c oordination disorder 
V60.89 Z59.2 Discord with neighbor, lodger, or landlord
V62.89 Z64.4 Discord with so cial service provider, including probation officer, 
case manager, or social services worker
313.89 F94.2 Disinhibited soci al engagement disorder
V61.03 Z63.5 Disruption of family  by separation or divorce
296.99 F34.8 Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder 
300.12 F44.0 Dissociative amnesia
300.13 F44.1 Dissociative amnesia,  with dissoc iative fugue
300.14 F44.81 Dissociative  identity disorder
307.7 F98.1 Encopresis
307.6 F98.0 Enuresis
302.72 F52.21 Erectile disorder
698.4 L98.1  Excoriation (s kin-picking) disorder
302.4 F65.2 Exhibitionistic disorder
V62.22 Z65.5 Exposure to disaster , war, or other hostilities
V60.2 Z59.5 Extreme poverty
300.19 F68.10 Factitious disorder
302.73 F52.31 Female orgasmic disorder
302.72 F52.22 Female sexual interest/arousal disorder
302.81 F65.0 Fetishistic disorder
302.89 F65.81 Frotteuristic disorder
312.31 F63.0 Gambling disorder
302.85 F64.1 Gender dysphoria in adolescents and adults
302.6 F64.2 Gender dysp horia in children
300.02 F41.1 Generalized anxiety disorder 
302.76 F52.6 Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder
315.8 F88 Global developmental delay
292.89 F16.983 Hallucinog en persisting perception disorder 
V61.8 Z63.8 High expressed emotion level within family
301.50 F60.4 Histrionic personality disorder
300.3 F42 Hoarding disorder
V60.0 Z59.0 Homelessness
307.44 F51.11 Hypersomnolence disorder
300.7 F45.21 Illness anxiety disorder
V62.5 Z65.1 Imprisonment or other incarceration
V60.1 Z59.1 Inadequate housingICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
848 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
292.89   Inhalant-induced anxiety disorder
  F18.180 With mild use disorder
  F18.280 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F18.980 Without use disorder
292.84   Inhalant-induced depressive disorder
  F18.14 With mild use disorder
  F18.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F18.94 Without use disorder
292.82   Inhalant-induced majo r neurocognitive disorder
  F18.17 With mild use disorder
  F18.27 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F18.97 Without use disorder
292.89   Inhalant-induced mild  neurocognitive disorder
  F18.188 With mild use disorder
  F18.288 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F18.988 Without use disorder
292.9   Inhalant-induced psychotic disorder
  F18.159 With mild use disorder
  F18.259 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F18.959 Without use disorder
292.89   Inhalant intoxication
  F18.129 With mild use disorder
  F18.229 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F18.929 Without use disorder
292.81   Inhalant intoxication delirium
  F18.121 With mild use disorder
  F18.221 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F18.921 Without use disorder
    Inhalant use disorder
305.90 F18.10 Mild
304.60 F18.20 Moderate
304.60 F18.20 Severe
307.42 F51.01 Insomnia disorder
V60.2 Z59.7 Insufficien t social insurance or welfare support
  Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder)
317  F70 Mild
318.0  F71 Moderate
318.1  F72 Severe
318.2  F73 Profound
312.34 F63.81 Intermittent explosive disorder 
312.32 F63.2 Kleptomania
V60.2 Z59.4 Lack of adequate f ood or safe drinking water
315.32 F80.2 Language disorder
V60.2 Z59.6 Low incomeICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) 849
    Major depressive disorder, Recurrent episode
296.36 F33.42 In full remission
296.35 F33.41 In partial remission
296.31 F33.0 Mild
296.32 F33.1 Moderate
296.33 F33.2 Severe 
296.34 F33.3 With psychotic features
296.30 F33.9 Unspecified
    Major depressive disorder, Single episode
296.26 F32.5 In full remission
296.25 F32.4 In partial remission
296.21 F32.0 Mild
296.22 F32.1 Moderate
296.23 F32.2 Severe 
296.24 F32.3 With psychotic features
296.20 F32.9 Unspecifed
331.9 G31.9 Major frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder, Possible
Major frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder, Probable ( code first  
331.19 [G31.09] frontotemporal disease)
294.11 F02.81 With behavioral disturbance
294.10 F02.80 Without behavioral disturbance
331.9 G31.9 Major neurocognitive disorder  due to Alzheimer’s disease, Possible
Major neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease, 
Probable (code first  331.0 [G30.9] Alzheimer’s disease)
294.11 F02.81 With behavioral disturbance
294.10 F02.80 Without behavioral disturbance
    Major neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition
294.11 F02.81 With behavioral disturbance
294.10 F02.80 Without behavioral disturbance
Major neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection ( code first  042 
[B20] HIV infection)
294.11 F02.81 With behavioral disturbance
294.10 F02.80 Without behavioral disturbance
Major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease ( code 
first 333.4 [G10] Huntington’s disease)
294.11 F02.81 With behavioral disturbance
294.10 F02.80 Without behavioral disturbance
331.9 G31.9 Major neurocogni tive disorder with Lewy bodies, Possible
Major neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, Probable ( code 
first 331.82 [G31.83] Lewy body disease)
294.11 F02.81 With behavioral disturbance
294.10 F02.80 Without behavioral disturbance
    Major neurocognitive disord er due to multiple etiologies
294.11 F02.81 With behavioral disturbance
294.10 F02.80 Without behavioral disturbanceICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
850 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
331.9 G31.9 Major neurocognitive disorder  due to Parkinson’s disease, Possible
Major neurocognitive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease, 
Probable (code first  332.0 [G20] Parkinson’s disease)
294.11 F02.81 With behavioral disturbance
294.10 F02.80 Without beha vioral disturbance
Major neurocognitive disord er due to prion disease ( code first  
046.79 [A81.9] prion disease)
294.11 F02.81 With behavioral disturbance
294.10 F02.80 Without beha vioral disturbance
Major neurocognitive disorder due to trauma tic brain injury (code 
first 907.0 late effect of intracranial  injury without skull fracture 
[S06.2X9S diffuse traumatic brain injury with loss of conscious-
ness of unspecified duration, sequela])
294.11 F02.81 With behavioral disturbance
294.10 F02.80 Without beha vioral disturbance
331.9 G31.9 Major vascular neuroc ognitive diso rder, Possible
    Major vascular neurocog nitive disorder, Probable
290.40 F01.51 With behavioral disturbance
290.40 F01.50 Without beha vioral disturbance
302.71 F52.0 Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder
V65.2 Z76.5 Malingering
333.99 G25.71 Medication-ind uced acute akathisia
333.72 G24.02 Medication-induced acute dystonia
292.81   Medication-induced delirium (for ICD-10-CM codes, see specific 
substances)
333.1 G25.1 Medication-indu ced postural tremor
331.83 G31.84 Mild frontotemporal  neurocognitive disorder
331.83 G31.84 Mild neurocognitive diso rder due to Alzheimer’s disease
331.83 G31.84 Mild neurocognitive disord er due to another medical condition
331.83 G31.84 Mild neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection
331.83 G31.84 Mild neurocognitive diso rder due to Huntington’s disease
331.83 G31.84 Mild neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies
331.83 G31.84 Mild neurocognitive diso rder due to Park inson’s disease
331.83 G31.84 Mild neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease
331.83 G31.84 Mild neurocognitive diso rder due to traumatic brain injury
331.83 G31.84 Mild neurocognitive  disorder with Lewy bodies
331.83 G31.84 Mild vascular neurocognitive disorder
301.81 F60.81 Narcissistic  personality disorder
   N arcolepsy
347.00 G47.419 Autosomal dominant ce rebellar ataxia, deafness, and 
narcolepsy
347.00 G47.419 Autosomal domi nant narcolepsy, obesity, and type 2 diabetes
347.10 G47.429 Narcolepsy secondary to another medical condition
347.01 G47.411 Narcolepsy wi th cataplexy but withou t hypocretin deficiency
347.00 G47.419 Narcolepsy without catapl exy but with hypocretin deficiency
332.1 G21.11 Neuroleptic-induced parkinsonismICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) 851
333.92 G21.0 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
307.47 F51.5 Nightmare disorder
V15.81 Z91.19 Nonadherence to medical treatment
    Non–rapid eye movement sleep arousal disorders
307.46 F51.4 Sleep terror type
307.46 F51.3 Sleepwalking type
300.3 F42 Obsessive-compulsive disorder
301.4 F60.5 Obsessive-compuls ive personality disorder
294.8 F06.8 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another 
medical condition 
327.23 G47.33 Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea
292.89   Opioid-induced anxiety disorder
  F11.188 With mild use disorder
  F11.288 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F11.988 Without use disorder
  F11.921 Opioid-induced delirium
292.84   Opioid-induced depressive disorder
  F11.14 With mild use disorder
  F11.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F11.94 Without use disorder
292.89   Opioid-induced sexual dysfunction
  F11.181 With mild use disorder
  F11.281 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F11.981 Without use disorder
292.85   Opioid-induce d sleep disorder
  F11.182 With mild use disorder
  F11.282 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F11.982 Without use disorder
292.89   Opioid intoxication
    Opioid intoxicati on, With perceptual disturbances
  F11.122 With mild use disorder
  F11.222 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F11.922 Without use disorder
    Opioid intoxicati on, Without percep tual disturbances
  F11.129 With mild use disorder
  F11.229 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F11.929 Without use disorder
292.81   Opioid intoxication delirium
  F11.121 With mild use disorder
  F11.221 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F11.921 Without use disorder
    Opioid use disorder
305.50 F11.10 Mild
304.00 F11.20 Moderate
304.00 F11.20 SevereICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
852 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
292.0 F11.23 Opioid withdrawal 
292.0 F11.23 Opioid withdrawal delirium
313.81 F91.3 Oppositional defiant disorder
    Other adverse effect of medication
995.20 T50.905A Initial encounter
995.20 T50.905S Sequelae
995.20 T50.905D Subsequent encounter
   Other circumstances related to adul t abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner
V62.83 Z69.82 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of 
nonspousal adult abuse
V65.49 Z69.81 Encounter for mental health  services for victim of nonspousal 
adult abuse
   Other circumstances related to child neglect
V62.83 Z69.021 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of 
nonparental child neglect
V61.22 Z69.011 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of parental 
child neglect
V61.21 Z69.010 Encounter for mental health se rvices for victim of child neglect by 
parent
V61.21 Z69.020 Encounter for mental health  services for victim of nonparental 
child neglect
V15.42 Z62.812 Personal history (past history) of neglect in childhood
   Other circumstances related to child physical abuse
V62.83 Z69.021 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of 
nonparental child abuse
V61.22 Z69.011 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of parental 
child abuse
V61.21 Z69.010 Encounter for mental health services for victim of child abuse by 
parent
V61.21 Z69.020 Encounter for mental health  services for victim of nonparental 
child abuse
V15.41 Z62.810 Personal histor y (past history) of phys ical abuse in childhood
   Other circumstances related to  child psychological abuse
V62.83 Z69.021 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of 
nonparental child psychological abuse
V61.22 Z69.011 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of parental 
child psychological abuse
V61.21 Z69.010 Encounter for mental health services for victim of child 
psychological abuse by parent
V61.21 Z69.020 Encounter for mental health  services for victim of nonparental 
child psychological abuse
V15.42 Z62.811 Personal histor y (past history) of psychological abuse in childhood
   Other circumstances related  to child sexual abuse
V62.83 Z69.021 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of 
nonparental child sexual abuse
V61.22 Z69.011 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of parental 
child sexual abuseICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) 853
V61.21 Z69.010 Encounter for mental health services for victim of child sexual 
abuse by parent
V61.21 Z69.020 Encounter for mental health  services for victim of nonparental 
child sexual abuse
V15.41 Z62.810 Personal his tory (past history) of se xual abuse in childhood
   Other circumstances related to spou se or partner abuse, Psychological
V61.12 Z69.12 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of spouse or 
partner psychological abuse
V61.11 Z69.11 Encounter for mental health  services for victim of spouse or 
partner psychological abuse
V15.42 Z91.411 Personal hi story (past history) of spouse or partner 
psychological abuse
   Other circumstances related to  spouse or partner neglect
V61.12 Z69.12 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of spouse or 
partner neglect
V61.11 Z69.11 Encounter for mental health  services for victim of spouse or 
partner neglect
V15.42 Z91.412 Personal his tory (past history) of sp ouse or partner neglect
   Other circumstances related to sp ouse or partner violence, Physical
V61.12 Z69.12 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of spouse or 
partner violence, Physical
V61.11 Z69.11 Encounter for mental health  services for victim of spouse or 
partner violence, Physical
V15.41 Z91.410 Personal histor y (past history) of spouse or partner violence, 
Physical
   Other circumstances related to sp ouse or partner violence, Sexual
V61.12 Z69.12 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of spouse or 
partner violence, Sexual
V61.11 Z69.81 Encounter for mental health  services for victim of spouse or 
partner violence, Sexual
V15.41 Z91.410 Personal histor y (past history) of spouse or partner violence, 
Sexual
V65.40 Z71.9 Other counseling or consultation
292.89   Other hallucinogen–i nduced anxiety disorder
  F16.180 With mild use disorder
  F16.280 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.980 Without use disorder
292.84   Other hallucinogen–induced  bipolar and related disorder
  F16.14 With mild use disorder
  F16.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.94 Without use disorder
292.84   Other hallucinogen–ind uced depressive disorder
  F16.14 With mild use disorder
  F16.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.94 Without use disorderICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
854 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
292.9   Other hallucinogen–induced psychotic disorder
  F16.159 With mild use disorder
  F16.259 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.959 Without use disorder
292.89   Other hallucinogen intoxication 
  F16.129 With mild use disorder
  F16.229 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.929 Without use disorder
292.81   Other hallucinogen intoxication delirium
  F16.121 With mild use disorder
  F16.221 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.921 Without use disorder
    Other hallucinogen use disorder
305.30 F16.10 Mild
304.50 F16.20 Moderate
304.50 F16.20 Severe
333.99 G25.79 Other medication-induced movement disorder
332.1 G21.19 Other medicatio n-induced parkinsonism
V15.49 Z91.49 Other personal hi story of psychological trauma
V15.89 Z91.89 Other personal risk factors
V62.29 Z56.9 Other problem related to employment
V62.89 Z65.8 Other problem relate d to psychosocial circumstances
300.09 F41.8 Other specif ied anxiety disorder
314.01 F90.8 Other specified attentio n-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
296.89 F31.89 Other specified bi polar and related disorder
780.09 R41.0 Other sp ecified delirium
311 F32.8 Other specified depressive disorder
312.89 F91.8 Other specified disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder
300.15 F44.89 Other specifie d dissociati ve disorder
    Other specified elimination disorder
787.60 R15.9 With fecal symptoms
788.39 N39.498 With urinary symptoms
307.59 F50.8 Other specified feeding or eating disorder
302.6 F64.8 Other specifie d gender dysphoria
780.54 G47.19 Other specified hypersomnolence disorder
780.52 G47.09 Other specified insomnia disorder
300.9 F99 Other specified mental disorder
294.8 F06.8 Other specified mental disord er due to another medical condition
315.8 F88 Other specified neur odevelopment al disorder
300.3 F42 Other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
302.89 F65.89 Other specifie d paraphilic disorder
301.89 F60.89 Other specifie d personality disorder
298.8 F28 Other specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder
302.79 F52.8 Other specifie d sexual dysfunctionICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) 855
780.59 G47.8 Other specified sleep-wake disorder
300.89 F45.8 Other specified somati c symptom and related disorder
307.20 F95.8 Other spec ified tic disorder
309.89 F43.8 Other specified trauma - and stressor-related disorder
292.89   Other (or unknown) subs tance–induced anxiety disorder
  F19.180 With mild use disorder
  F19.280 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F19.980 Without use disorder
292.84   Other (or unknown) substance–induced bipolar and related disorder
  F19.14 With mild use disorder
  F19.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F19.94 Without use disorder
  F19.921 Other (or unknown) substance–induced delirium
292.84   Other (or unknown) substa nce–induced depressive disorder
  F19.14 With mild use disorder
  F19.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F19.94 Without use disorder
292.82   Other (or unknown) substance–induced major neurocognitive 
disorder
  F19.17 With mild use disorder
  F19.27 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F19.97 Without use disorder
292.89   Other (or unknown) substance–induced mild neurocognitive 
disorder
  F19.188 With mild use disorder
  F19.288 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F19.988 Without use disorder
292.89   Other (or unknown) substance–induced obsessive-compulsive 
and related disorder
  F19.188 With mild use disorder
  F19.288 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F19.988 Without use disorder
292.9   Other (or unknown) substa nce–induced psychotic disorder
  F19.159 With mild use disorder
  F19.259 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F19.959 Without use disorder
292.89   Other (or unknown) substa nce–induced sexual dysfunction
  F19.181 With mild use disorder
  F19.281 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F19.981 Without use disorder
292.85   Other (or unknown) subs tance–induced sleep disorder
  F19.182 With mild use disorder
  F19.282 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F19.982 Without use disorderICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
856 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
292.89   Other (or unknown) substance intoxication 
  F19.129 With mild use disorder
  F19.229 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F19.929 Without use disorder
292.81   Other (or unknown) subs tance intoxication delirium
  F19.121 With mild use disorder
  F19.221 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F19.921 Without use disorder
    Other (or unknown) substance use disorder
305.90 F19.10 Mild
304.90 F19.20 Moderate
304.90 F19.20 Severe
292.0 F19.239 Other (or unknown)  substance withdrawal 
292.0 F19.231 Other (or unknown) su bstance withdrawal delirium
Other or unspecified stimulant use disorder
305.70 F15.10 Mild
304.40 F15.20 Moderate
304.40 F15.20 Severe
278.00 E66.9 Overweight or obesity
Panic attack specifier
300.01 F41.0 Panic disorder 
301.0 F60.0 Paranoid pe rsonality disorder
V61.20 Z62.820 Parent-child relational problem
302.2 F65.4 Pedophilic disorder
307.22 F95.1 Persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder
300.4 F34.1 Persistent depressi ve disorder (dysthymia)
V62.22 Z91.82 Personal history of military deployment
V15.59 Z91.5 Personal history of self-harm
310.1 F07.0 Personality change du e to another medical condition
V62.89 Z60.0 Phase of life problem
292.89   Phencyclidine-induced anxiety disorder
  F16.180 With mild use disorder
  F16.280 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.980 Without use disorder
292.84   Phencyclidine-i nduced bipolar an d related disorder
  F16.14 With mild use disorder
  F16.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.94 Without use disorder
292.84   Phencyclidine-induc ed depressive disorder
  F16.14 With mild use disorder
  F16.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.94 Without use disorderICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) 857
292.9   Phencyclidine-indu ced psychotic disorder
  F16.159 With mild use disorder
  F16.259 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.959 Without use disorder
292.89   Phencyclidine intoxication
  F16.129 With mild use disorder
  F16.229 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.929 Without use disorder
292.81   Phencyclidine intoxication delirium
  F16.121 With mild use disorder
  F16.221 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F16.921 Without use disorder
    Phencyclidine use disorder
305.90 F16.10 Mild
304.60 F16.20 Moderate
304.60 F16.20 Severe
307.52   Pica 
  F50.8 In adults
  F98.3 In children
309.81 F43.10 Posttraumatic stress disorder
302.75 F52.4 Premature (early) ejaculation
625.4 N94.3 Premenstrual dysphoric disorder 
V62.21 Z56.82 Problem related to cu rrent military deployment status
V69.9 Z72.9 Problem related to lifestyle
V60.3 Z60.2 Problem related to living alone
V60.6 Z59.3 Problem related to living in a residential institution
V61.5 Z64.1 Problems related to multiparity
V62.5 Z65.3 Problems related to other legal circumstances
V62.5 Z65.2 Problems related to release from prison
V61.7 Z64.0 Problems related to unwanted pregnancy
307.21 F95.0 Provisional tic disorder
316 F54 Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions
    Psychotic dis order due to another medical condition
293.81 F06.2 With delusions
293.82 F06.0 With hallucinations
312.33 F63.1 Pyromania
327.42 G47.52 Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder
313.89 F94.1 Reactive attachment disorder
V61.10 Z63.0 Relationship distress wi th spouse or intimate partner
V62.89 Z65.8 Religious or spiritual problem
333.94 G25.81 Restless legs syndrome
307.53 F98.21 Rumination disorderICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
858 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
    Schizoaffective disorder
295.70 F25.0 Bipolar type
295.70 F25.1 Depressive type
301.20 F60.1 Schizoid pe rsonality disorder
295.90 F20.9 Schizophrenia
295.40 F20.81 Schizoph reniform disorder
301.22 F21 Schizotypal personality disorder
292.89   Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced anxiety disorder
  F13.180 With mild use disorder
  F13.280 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F13.980 Without use disorder
292.84   Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiol ytic-induced bipolar and related 
disorder
  F13.14 With mild use disorder
  F13.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F13.94 Without use disorder
  F13.921 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or  anxiolytic-induced delirium
292.84   Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiol ytic-induced depr essive disorder
  F13.14 With mild use disorder
  F13.24 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F13.94 Without use disorder
292.82   Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiol ytic-induced major neurocognitive 
disorder
  F13.27 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F13.97 Without use disorder
292.89   Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiol ytic-induced mild neurocognitive 
disorder
  F13.288 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F13.988 Without use disorder
292.9   Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced ps ychotic disorder
  F13.159 With mild use disorder
  F13.259 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F13.959 Without use disorder
292.89   Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiol ytic-induced sexual dysfunction
  F13.181 With mild use disorder
  F13.281 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F13.981 Without use disorder
292.85   Sedative-, hypnotic-, or an xiolytic-induced sleep disorder
  F13.182 With mild use disorder
  F13.282 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F13.982 Without use disorder
292.89   Sedative, hy pnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication
  F13.129 With mild use disorder
  F13.229 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F13.929 Without use disorderICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) 859
292.81   Sedative, hypnot ic, or anxiolytic intoxication delirium
  F13.121 With mild use disorder
  F13.221 With moderate or severe use disorder
  F13.921 Without use disorder
    Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
305.40 F13.10 Mild
304.10 F13.20 Moderate
304.10 F13.20 Severe
292.0   Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal
  F13.232 With perceptual disturbances
  F13.239 Without perceptual disturbances
292.0 F13.231 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal delirium
313.23 F94.0 Selective mutism 
309.21 F93.0 Separation anxiety disorder 
V65.49 Z70.9 Sex counseling
302.83 F65.51 Sexual masochism disorder
302.84 F65.52 Sexual sadism disorder
V61.8 Z62.891 Sibling relational problem
    Sleep-related hypoventilation
327.26 G47.36 Comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation
327.25 G47.35 Congenital centra l alveolar hypoventilation
327.24 G47.34 Idiopathic hypoventilation
300.23 F40.10 Social anxiety disorder (social phobia)
V62.4 Z60.4 Social exclusion or rejection
315.39 F80.89 Social (pragmat ic) communication disorder
300.82 F45.1 Somatic symptom disorder
    Specific learning disorder
315.1 F81.2 With impairment in mathematics
315.00 F81.0 With impairment in reading
315.2 F81.81 With impairment  in written expression
    Specific phobia
300.29 F40.218 Animal
300.29   Blood-injection-injury
F40.230 Fear of blood
F40.231 Fear of injections and transfusions
F40.233 Fear of injury
F40.232 Fear of other medical care
300.29 F40.228 Natural environment
300.29 F40.298 Other
300.29 F40.248 Situational 
315.39 F80.0 Speech sound disorder
    Spouse or partner abuse,  Psychological, Confirmed
995.82 T74.31XA Initial encounter
995.82 T74.31XD Subsequent encounterICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
860 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
    Spouse or partner abuse, Psychological, Suspected
995.82 T76.31XA Initial encounter
995.82 T76.31XD Subsequent encounter
    Spouse or partner neglect, Confirmed
995.85 T74.01XA Initial encounter
995.85 T74.01XD Subsequent encounter
    Spouse or partner neglect, Suspected
995.85 T76.01XA Initial encounter
995.85 T76.01XD Subsequent encounter
    Spouse or partner viol ence, Physical, Confirmed
995.81 T74.11XA Initial encounter
995.81 T74.11XD Subsequent encounter
    Spouse or partner violence, Physical, Suspected
995.81 T76.11XA Initial encounter
995.81 T76.11XD Subsequent encounter
    Spouse or partner violence, Sexual, Confirmed
995.83 T74.21XA Initial encounter
995.83 T74.21XD Subsequent encounter
    Spouse or partner violence, Sexual, Suspected
995.83 T76.21XA Initial encounter
995.83 T76.21XD Subsequent encounter
307.3 F98.4 Stereotypic movement disorder
  Stimulant in toxication (see amphetamine or cocaine intoxication for 
specific codes)
    Stimulant use disorder (see amphetamine or cocaine use disorder for 
specific codes)
 S timulant withdrawal (see amphetamine or cocaine withdrawal for 
specific codes)
    Substance intoxication delirium (see specific subs tances for codes)
    Substance withdrawal delirium (see specific subs tances for codes)
    Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder (see specific 
substances for codes)
    Substance/medication-induced bipolar and related disorder (see 
specific substa nces for codes)
    Substance/medication-induced depressive disorder (see specific 
substances for codes)
    Substance/medication-induced major or mild neurocognitive 
disorder (see specific substances for codes)
    Substance/medication-induced ob sessive-compulsive and related 
disorder (see specific substances for codes)
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder (see specific 
substances for codes)
Substance/medication-induced sexual dysfunction (see specific 
substances for codes)
Substance/medication-induced sleep disorder (see specific 
substances for codes)ICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM) 861
333.99 G25.71 Tardive akathisia
333.85 G24.01 Tardive dyskinesia
333.72 G24.09 Tardive dystonia
V62.4 Z60.5 Target of (perceived) adve rse discrimination or persecution
292.85   Tobacco-induc ed sleep disorder
  F17.208 With moderate or severe use disorder
    Tobacco use disorder
305.1 Z72.0 Mild
305.1 F17.200 Moderate
305.1 F17.200 Severe
292.0 F17.203 Tobacco withdrawal
307.23 F95.2 Tourette’s disorder 
302.3 F65.1 Transvestic disorder
312.39 F63.3 Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) 
V63.9 Z75.3 Unavailability or inaccessibility of health care facilities
V63.8 Z75.4 Unavailability or inaccessibility of other helping agencies
V62.82 Z63.4 Uncomplic ated bereavement
291.9 F10.99 Unspecified alcohol-related disorder
300.00 F41.9 Unspecified  anxiety disorder
314.01 F90.9 Unspecified attention- deficit/hyperacti vity disorder
296.80 F31.9 Unspecified bipo lar and related disorder
292.9 F15.99 Unspecified caffeine-related disorder
292.9 F12.99 Unspecified cannabis-related disorder
293.89 F06.1 Unspecified catatonia ( code first  781.99 [R29.818] other symptoms 
involving nervous and musculoskeletal systems)
307.9 F80.9 Unspecified co mmunication disorder
780.09 R41.0 Unspecified delirium
311 F32.9 Unspecified depressive disorder
312.9 F91.9 Unspecified disruptive, impu lse-control, and conduct disorder
300.15 F44.9 Unspecified di ssociative disorder 
    Unspecified elimination disorder 
787.60 R15.9 With fecal symptoms
788.30 R32 With urinary symptoms
307.50 F50.9 Unspecified feed ing or eating disorder
302.6 F64.9 Unspecified gender dysphoria
292.9 F16.99 Unspecified hallucinogen-related disorder
V60.9 Z59.9 Unspecified hous ing or economic problem
780.54 G47.10 Unspecified hy persomnolence disorder
292.9 F18.99 Unspecified inhalant-related disorder
780.52 G47.00 Unspecified insomnia disorder
319 F79 Unspecified intellectual disability (intellectual developmental 
disorder)
300.9 F99 Unspecified mental disorder
294.9 F09 Unspecified mental disorder  due to another medical condition
799.59 R41.9 Unspecified ne urocognitive disorderICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
862 Alphabetical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses  and Codes (ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM)
315.9 F89 Unspecified neurodevelopmental disorder
300.3 F42 Unspecified obsessive-co mpulsive and related disorder
292.9 F11.99 Unspecified opioid-related disorder
292.9 F19.99 Unspecified other (or unkn own) substance–related disorder 
302.9 F65.9 Unspecified paraphilic disorder
301.9 F60.9 Unspecified personality disorder
292.9 F16.99 Unspecified phency clidine-related disorder
V62.9 Z60.9 Unspecified problem related to social environment
V62.9 Z65.9 Unspecified problem related to unspecified psychosocial 
circumstances
298.9 F29 Unspecified schizophrenia spec trum and other psychotic disorder
292.9 F13.99 Unspecified sedative-, hypnot ic-, or anxiolytic-related disorder
302.70 F52.9 Unspecified sexual dysfunction
780.59 G47.9 Unspecified sleep-wake disorder
300.82 F45.9 Unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder
292.9   Unspecified stimul ant-related disorder
  F15.99 Unspecified amphetamine or other stimulant-related disorder
  F14.99 Unspecified cocaine-related disorder
307.20 F95.9 Unspecifi ed tic disorder
292.9 F17.209 Unspecified to bacco-related disorder
309.9 F43.9 Unspecified trauma- an d stressor-related disorder
V61.8 Z62.29 Upbringing away from parents
V62.89 Z65.4 Victim of crime
V62.89 Z65.4 Victim of terrorism or torture
302.82 F65.3 Voyeuristic disorder
V40.31 Z91.83 Wandering associat ed with a mental disorderICD-9-CM ICD-10-CM Disorder, condition, or problem
863Numerical Listing of
DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes
(ICD-9-CM)
ICD-9-CM codes are to be used for coding  purposes in the United States through 
September 30, 2014. 
ICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
278.00 Overweight or obesity
290.40 Probable major vascular neurocognitive  disorder, With behavioral disturbance
290.40 Probable major vascular neurocog nitive disorder, Without behavioral 
disturbance
291.0 Alcohol intoxication delirium
291.0 Alcohol withdrawal delirium
291.1 Alcohol-induced major ne urocognitive disorder, Amnestic confabulatory type
291.2 Alcohol-induced major neurocognitive disorder, Nonamnestic confabulatory type
291.81 Alcohol withdrawal
291.82 Alcohol-induced sleep disorder
291.89 Alcohol-induced anxiety disorder
291.89 Alcohol-induced bipolar and related disorder
291.89 Alcohol-induced depressive disorder
291.89 Alcohol-induced mild neurocognitive disorder
291.89 Alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction
291.9 Alcohol-induced psychotic disorder
291.9 Unspecified alco hol-related disorder
292.0 Amphetamine or other stimulant withdrawal 
292.0 Caffeine withdrawal 
292.0 Cannabis withdrawal 
292.0 Cocaine withdrawal 
292.0 Opioid withdrawal 
292.0 Opioid withdrawal delirium
292.0 Other (or unknown) substance withdrawal 
292.0 Other (or unknown) subs tance withdrawal delirium
292.0 Sedative, hypnotic, or  anxiolytic withdrawal
292.0 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdr awal delirium
292.0 Tobacco withdrawal
292.81 Amphetamine (or other stim ulant) intoxication delirium
292.81 Cannabis intoxication delirium
292.81 Cocaine intox ication delirium
864 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM)
292.81 Inhalant intoxication delirium
292.81 Medication-induced delirium
292.81 Opioid intoxication delirium
292.81 Other hallucinogen intoxication delirium
292.81 Other (or unknown) subs tance intoxication delirium
292.81 Phencyclidine intoxication delirium
292.81 Sedative, hypnotic, or an xiolytic intoxication delirium
292.82 Inhalant-induced majo r neurocognitive disorder
292.82 Other (or unknown) substance–in duced major neurocognitive disorder
292.82 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic -induced major neurocognitive disorder
292.84 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–i nduced bipolar an d related disorder
292.84 Amphetamine (or other stimulan t)–induced depressive disorder
292.84 Cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder
292.84 Cocaine-induced depressive disorder
292.84 Inhalant-induced depressive disorder
292.84 Opioid-induced depressive disorder
292.84 Other hallucinogen–induced bipolar and related disorder
292.84 Other hallucinogen–indu ced depressi ve disorder
292.84 Other (or unknown) substance–in duced bipolar and related disorder
292.84 Other (or unknown) substanc e–induced depres sive disorder
292.84 Phencyclidine-induced bi polar and related disorder
292.84 Phencyclidine-induce d depressive disorder
292.84 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic -induced bipolar and related disorder
292.84 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiol ytic-induced depr essive disorder
292.85 Amphetamine (or other stim ulant)–induced sleep disorder
292.85 Caffeine-induced sleep disorder
292.85 Cannabis-induced sleep disorder
292.85 Cocaine-induced sleep disorder
292.85 Opioid-induced sleep disorder
292.85 Other (or unknown) subs tance–induced sleep disorder
292.85 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or an xiolytic-induced  sleep disorder
292.85 Tobacco-induced sleep disorder
292.89 Amphetamine (or other stimul ant)–induced anxiety disorder
292.89 Amphetamine (or other st imulant)–induced obsessiv e-compulsive and related 
disorder
292.89 Amphetamine (or other stimulan t)–induced sexual dysfunction
292.89 Amphetamine or other stimulant intoxication
292.89 Caffeine-induced anxiety disorder
292.89 Cannabis-induced anxiety disorder
292.89 Cannabis intoxication
292.89 Cocaine-induced anxiety disorder
292.89 Cocaine-induced obsessive-co mpulsive and related disorder
292.89 Cocaine-induced sexual dysfunction
292.89 Cocaine intoxication
292.89 Hallucinogen persisti ng perception disorder ICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM) 865
292.89 Inhalant-induced anxiety disorder
292.89 Inhalant-induced mild  neurocognitive disorder
292.89 Inhalant intoxication
292.89 Opioid-induced anxiety disorder
292.89 Opioid-induced sexual dysfunction
292.89 Opioid intoxication
292.89 Other hallucinogen–induced anxiety disorder
292.89 Other hallucinogen intoxication 
292.89 Other (or unknown) substance–induced anxiety disorder
292.89 Other (or unknown) substance–in duced mild neurocognitive disorder
292.89 Other (or unknown) substance–induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
292.89 Other (or unknown) substanc e–induced sexual  dysfunction
292.89 Other (or unknown) substance intoxication 
292.89 Phencyclidine-indu ced anxiety disorder
292.89 Phencyclidine intoxication
292.89 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxi olytic-induced anxiety disorder
292.89 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or  anxiolytic-induced mild  neurocognitive disorder
292.89 Sedative-, hypnotic- , or anxiolytic-induced  sexual dysfunction
292.89 Sedative, hypnotic, or  anxiolytic intoxication 
292.9 Amphetamine (or other stimul ant)–induced ps ychotic disorder
292.9 Cannabis-induced psychotic disorder
292.9 Cocaine-induced psychotic disorder
292.9 Inhalant-induced psychotic disorder
292.9 Other hallucinogen–induced psych otic disorder
292.9 Other (or unknown) substa nce–induced psychotic disorder
292.9 Phencyclidine -induced psychotic disorder
292.9 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiol ytic-induced psychotic disorder
292.9 Unspecified caffeine-related disorder
292.9 Unspecified cannabis-related disorder
292.9 Unspecified hallucin ogen-related disorder
292.9 Unspecified inhalant-related disorder
292.9 Unspecified opioid-related disorder
292.9 Unspecified other (or unknown) substance–related disorder 
292.9 Unspecified phencycl idine-related disorder
292.9 Unspecified sedative-, hypnotic- , or anxiolytic-related disorder
292.9 Unspecified stimulant-related disorder
292.9 Unspecified tobacco-related disorder
293.0 Delirium due to another medical condition
293.0 Delirium due to multiple etiologies
293.81 Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition, With delusions
293.82 Psychotic disord er due to another medical condition, With hallucinations
293.83 Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition
293.83 Depressive disorder due to another medical condition
293.84 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition
293.89 Catatonia associated with another mental disorder (catatonia specifier)ICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
866 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM)
293.89 Catatonic disorder due to  another medical condition
293.89 Unspecified catatonia ( code first  781.99 other symptoms involving nervous and 
musculoskeletal systems)
294.10 Major neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, Without 
behavioral disturbance
294.10 Major neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection, Without behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  042 HIV infection)
294.10 Major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, Without 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  333.4 Huntington’s disease)
294.10 Major neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies, Without behavioral 
disturbance
294.10 Major neurocognitive disorder probab ly due to Parkinson’ s disease, Without 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  332.0 Parkinson’s disease)
294.10 Major neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease, Without behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  046.79 prion disease)
294.10 Major neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury, Without 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  907.0 late effect of intracranial injury without 
skull fracture)
294.10 Probable major frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder, Without behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  331.19 frontotemporal disease)
294.10 Probable major neurocognitive disor der due to Alzheimer’ s disease,  Without 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  331.0 Alzheimer’s disease)
294.10 Probable major neurocognitive disorder  with Lewy bodies, Without behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  331.82 Lewy body disease)
294.11 Major neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition, With 
behavioral disturbance
294.11 Major neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection, With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  042 HIV infection)
294.11 Major neurocognitive diso rder due to Huntington’s disease, With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  333.4 Huntington’s disease)
294.11 Major neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies, With behavioral 
disturbance
294.11 Major neurocognitive disorder prob ably due to Parkinso n’s disease, With 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  332.0 Parkinson’s disease)
294.11 Major neurocognitive disorder due to prion disease, With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  046.79 prion disease)
294.11 Major neurocognitive diso rder due to traumatic brai n injury, With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  907.0 late effect of intracranial injury without skull 
fracture)
294.11 Probable major frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder, With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  331.19 frontotemporal disease)
294.11 Probable major neurocognitive disor der due to Alzheimer’ s disease, With 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  331.0 Alzheimer’s disease)
294.11 Probable major neurocog nitive disorder with Lewy bodies, With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  331.82 Lew y body disease)
294.8 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition 
294.8 Other specified mental disorder due to another medical condition
294.9 Unspecified mental disorder due to another medical conditionICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM) 867
295.40 Schizophreniform disorder
295.70 Schizoaffective disorder, Bipolar type
295.70 Schizoaffective diso rder, Depressive type
295.90 Schizophrenia
296.20 Major depressive disorder , Single episode, Unspecifed
296.21 Major depressive disord er, Single episode, Mild
296.22 Major depressive disorder , Single episode, Moderate
296.23 Major depressive disorder , Single episode, Severe 
296.24 Major depressive disorder, Single  episode, With psychotic features
296.25 Major depressive disorder, Sing le episode, In partial remission
296.26 Major depressive disorder, Si ngle episode, In full remission
296.30 Major depressive disorder, Recurrent episode, Unspecified
296.31 Major depressive disord er, Recurrent episode, Mild
296.32 Major depressive disorder, Recurrent episode, Moderate
296.33 Major depressive disorder, Recurrent episode, Severe 
296.34 Major depressive disorder, Recurr ent episode, With psychotic features
296.35 Major depressive disorder, Recurr ent episode, In partial remission
296.36 Major depressive disorder, Recu rrent episode, In full remission
296.40 Bipolar I disorder, Current or  most recent episode hypomanic
296.40 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode hypomanic, Unspecified
296.40 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode manic, Unspecified
296.41 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode manic, Mild
296.42 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode manic, Moderate
296.43 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode manic, Severe
296.44 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode manic, With psychotic features
296.45 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode hypomanic, In partial remission
296.45 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most re cent episode manic, In partial remission
296.46 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most re cent episode hypomani c, In full remission
296.46 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most re cent episode manic, In full remission
296.50 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode depressed, Unspecified
296.51 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode depressed, Mild
296.52 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode depressed, Moderate
296.53 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode depressed, Severe
296.54 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most re cent episode depresse d, With psychotic 
features
296.55 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode depressed, In partial remission
296.56 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most rece nt episode depressed, In full remission
296.7 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode unspecified 
296.80 Unspecified bipolar and related disorder
296.89 Bipolar II disorder
296.89 Other specified bipo lar and related disorder
296.99 Disruptive mood dy sregulation disorder 
297.1 Delusional disorder
298.8 Brief psychotic disorder
298.8 Other specified schizophrenia sp ectrum and other psychotic disorderICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
868 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM)
298.9 Unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder
299.00 Autism spectrum disorder
300.00 Unspecified anxiety disorder
300.01 Panic disorder 
300.02 Generalized anxiety disorder 
300.09 Other specified anxiety disorder
300.11 Conversion disorder (functional  neurological symptom disorder)
300.12 Dissociative amnesia
300.13 Dissociative amnesia, With dissociative fugue
300.14 Dissociative identity disorder
300.15 Other specified di ssociative disorder
300.15 Unspecified dissociative disorder 
300.19 Factitious disorder
300.22 Agoraphobia
300.23 Social anxiety disorder (social phobia)
300.29 Specific phobia, Animal
300.29 Specific phobia, Blood-injection-injury
300.29 Specific phobia, Natural environment
300.29 Specific phobia, Other
300.29 Specific phobia, Situational 
300.3 Hoarding disorder
300.3 Obsessive-com pulsive disorder
300.3 Other specified obsessive-compulsive and re lated disorder
300.3 Unspecified obsessive-comp ulsive and re lated disorder
300.4 Persistent depressive  disorder (dysthymia)
300.6 Depersonalization/derealization disorder
300.7 Body dysmorphic disorder
300.7 Illness anxiety disorder
300.82 Somatic symptom disorder
300.82 Unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder
300.89 Other specified somatic symptom and related disorder
300.9 Other specified mental disorder
300.9 Unspecified mental disorder
301.0 Paranoid personality disorder
301.13 Cyclothymic disorder 
301.20 Schizoid personality disorder
301.22 Schizotypal personality disorder
301.4 Obsessive-compulsiv e personality disorder
301.50 Histrionic pe rsonality disorder
301.6 Dependent personality disorder
301.7 Antisocial pers onality disorder
301.81 Narcissistic pe rsonality disorder
301.82 Avoidant personality disorder
301.83 Borderline personality disorder
301.89 Other specified personality disorderICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM) 869
301.9 Unspecified pe rsonality disorder
302.2 Pedophilic disorder
302.3 Transvestic disorder
302.4 Exhibitionistic disorder
302.6 Gender dysphoria in children
302.6 Other specified gender dysphoria
302.6 Unspecified gender dysphoria
302.70 Unspecified sexual dysfunction
302.71 Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder
302.72 Erectile disorder
302.72 Female sexual interest/arousal disorder
302.73 Female orgasmic disorder
302.74 Delayed ejaculation
302.75 Premature (early) ejaculation
302.76 Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder
302.79 Other specified sexual dysfunction
302.81 Fetishistic disorder
302.82 Voyeuristic disorder
302.83 Sexual masochism disorder
302.84 Sexual sadism disorder
302.85 Gender dysphoria in adolescents and adults
302.89 Frotteuristic disorder
302.89 Other specified paraphilic disorder
302.9 Unspecified paraphilic disorder
303.00 Alcohol intoxication
303.90 Alcohol use disorder, Moderate
303.90 Alcohol use disorder, Severe
304.00 Opioid use disorder, Moderate
304.00 Opioid use disorder, Severe
304.10 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxi olytic use disorder, Moderate
304.10 Sedative, hypnotic, or an xiolytic use disorder, Severe
304.20 Cocaine use disorder, Moderate
304.20 Cocaine use disorder, Severe
304.30 Cannabis use disorder, Moderate
304.30 Cannabis use disorder, Severe
304.40 Amphetamine-type substa nce use disorder, Moderate
304.40 Amphetamine-type subs tance use disorder, Severe
304.40 Other or unspecified stimulant use diso rder, Moderate
304.40 Other or unspecified st imulant use disorder, Severe
304.50 Other hallucinogen use disorder, Moderate
304.50 Other hallucinogen use disorder, Severe
304.60 Inhalant use disorder, Moderate
304.60 Inhalant use disorder, Severe
304.60 Phencyclidine us e disorder, Moderate
304.60 Phencyclidine us e disorder, SevereICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
870 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM)
304.90 Other (or unknown) subs tance use disorder, Moderate
304.90 Other (or unknown) subs tance use disorder, Severe
305.00 Alcohol use disorder, Mild
305.1 Tobacco use disorder, Mild
305.1 Tobacco use disorder, Moderate
305.1 Tobacco use disorder, Severe
305.20 Cannabis use disorder, Mild
305.30 Other hallucinogen use disorder, Mild
305.40 Sedative, hypnotic, or an xiolytic use disorder, Mild
305.50 Opioid use disorder, Mild
305.60 Cocaine use disorder, Mild
305.70 Amphetamine-type subs tance use disorder, Mild
305.70 Other or unspecified st imulant use disorder, Mild
305.90 Caffeine intoxication 
305.90 Inhalant use disorder, Mild
305.90 Other (or unknown) su bstance use disorder, Mild
305.90 Phencyclidine use disorder, Mild
307.0 Adult-onset fluency disorder
307.1 Anorexia nervosa
307.20 Other specified tic disorder
307.20 Unspecified tic disorder
307.21 Provisional tic disorder 
307.22 Persistent (chronic) mo tor or vocal tic disorder
307.23 Tourette’s disorder 
307.3 Stereotypic movement disorder
307.42 Insomnia disorder
307.44 Hypersomnolence disorder
307.45 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake di sorders, Advanced  sleep phase type
307.45 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake di sorders, Delayed sleep phase type
307.45 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake di sorders, Irregula r sleep-wake type
307.45 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, Non-24-hour sleep-wake type
307.45 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake  disorders, Shift work type
307.45 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake  disorders, Unspecified type
307.46 Non–rapid eye movement sleep ar ousal disorders, Sleep terror type
307.46 Non–rapid eye movement sleep ar ousal disorders, Sleepwalking type
307.47 Nightmare disorder
307.50 Unspecified feedin g or eating disorder
307.51 Binge-eating disorder
307.51 Bulimia nervosa
307.52 Pica 
307.53 Rumination disorder
307.59 Avoidant/restrictive  food intake disorder
307.59 Other specified feed ing or eating disorder
307.6 Enuresis
307.7 Encopresis
307.9 Unspecified communication disorderICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM) 871
308.3 Acute stress disorder 
309.0 Adjustment disorders , With depressed mood
309.21 Separation anxiety disorder 
309.24 Adjustment disorders, With anxiety
309.28 Adjustment disorders, With mixed anxiety and depressed mood
309.3 Adjustment disorders, With  disturbance of conduct
309.4 Adjustment disorders, With mixed disturbance of em otions and conduct
309.81 Posttraumatic stress disorder
309.89 Other specified trauma- an d stressor-related disorder
309.9 Adjustment disorders, Unspecified
309.9 Unspecified trauma- and stressor-related disorder
310.1 Personality change due to another medical condition
311 Other specified depressive disorder
311 Unspecified depressive disorder
312.31 Gambling disorder
312.32 Kleptomania
312.33 Pyromania
312.34 Intermittent ex plosive disorder 
312.39 Trichotillomania (h air-pulling disorder) 
312.81 Conduct disorder, Childhood-onset type
312.82 Conduct disorder, Adolescent-onset type
312.89 Conduct disorder, Unspecified onset
312.89 Other specified disr uptive, impulse-control,  and conduct disorder
312.9 Unspecified disruptive, impuls e-control, and conduct disorder
313.23 Selective mutism
313.81 Oppositional defiant disorder
313.89 Disinhibited social  engagement disorder
313.89 Reactive attachment disorder
314.00 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, Predominantly inattentive presentation
314.01 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder, Combin ed presentation
314.01 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, Predomin antly hyperactive/
impulsive presentation
314.01 Other specified attention- deficit/hyperacti vity disorder
314.01 Unspecified attention-de ficit/hyperactivity disorder
315.00 Specific learning disorder , With impairment in reading
315.1 Specific learning disorder, With impair ment in mathematics
315.2 Specific learning di sorder, With impairment  in written expression
315.32 Language disorder
315.35 Childhood-onset fluenc y disorder (stuttering)
315.39 Social (pragmatic ) communication disorder
315.39 Speech sound disorder
315.4 Developmental coor dination disorder 
315.8 Global developmental delay
315.8 Other specified neurodevelopmental disorder
315.9 Unspecified neurodevelopmental disorder
316 Psychological factors affecting other medical conditionsICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
872 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM)
317 Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), Mild
318.0 Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), Moderate
318.1 Intellectual disability (intelle ctual developmental disorder), Severe
318.2 Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), Profound
319 Unspecified intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder)
327.21 Central sleep apnea, Idio pathic central sleep apnea
327.23 Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea
327.24 Sleep-related hy poventilation, Idiopathic hypoventilation
327.25 Sleep-related hypovent ilation, Congenital centra l alveolar hypoventilation
327.26 Sleep-related hypoventilation, Como rbid sleep-relate d hypoventilation
327.42 Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder
331.83 Mild frontotemporal ne urocognitive disorder
331.83 Mild neurocognitive disord er due to Alzheimer’s disease
331.83 Mild neurocognitive disorder due to another medical condition
331.83 Mild neurocognitive disorder due to HIV infection
331.83 Mild neurocognitive disorder  due to Huntington’s disease
331.83 Mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies
331.83 Mild neurocognitive disord er due to multiple etiologies
331.83 Mild neurocognitive disord er due to Parkin son’s disease
331.83 Mild neurocognitive diso rder due to prion disease
331.83 Mild neurocognitive disorder due to traumatic brain injury
331.83 Mild vascular neur ocognitive disorder
331.9 Major neurocognitive disorder possibly due to Parkinson’s disease
331.9 Possible major frontotempor al neurocognitive disorder
331.9 Possible major neurocognitive di sorder due to Al zheimer’s disease
331.9 Possible major neurocognitive disorder with  Lewy bodies
331.9 Possible major vascular  neurocognitive disorder
333.1 Medication-induce d postural tremor
332.1 Neuroleptic-ind uced parkinsonism
332.1 Other medication-i nduced pa rkinsonism
333.72 Medication-induced acute dystonia
333.72 Tardive dystonia
333.85 Tardive dyskinesia
333.92 Neuroleptic ma lignant syndrome
333.94 Restless legs syndrome
333.99 Medication-induc ed acute akathisia
333.99 Other medication-ind uced movement disorder
333.99 Tardive akathisia
347.00 Autosomal dominant cerebellar  ataxia, deafness, and narcolepsy
347.00 Autosomal dominant narcolepsy, obesity, and type 2 diabetes
347.00 Narcolepsy withou t cataplexy but with hypocretin deficiency
347.01 Narcolepsy with cataplexy but without hypocretin deficiency
347.10 Narcolepsy secondary to another medical condition
625.4 Premenstrual dysphoric disorder 
698.4 Excoriation (ski n-picking) disorderICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM) 873
780.09 Other specified delirium
780.09 Unspecified delirium
780.52 Other specified insomnia disorder
780.52 Unspecified insomnia disorder
780.54 Other specified hy persomnolence disorder
780.54 Unspecified hypersomnolence disorder
780.57 Central sleep apnea, Central sl eep apnea comorbid with opioid use
780.59 Other specified sleep-wake disorder
780.59 Unspecified sleep-wake disorder
786.04 Central sleep apnea, Cheyne-Stokes breathing
787.60 Other specified elimination disorder, With fecal symptoms
787.60 Unspecified elimination di sorder, With fecal symptoms
788.30 Unspecified elimination di sorder, With urinary symptoms
788.39 Other specified elimination disorder, With urinary symptoms
799.59 Unspecified neur ocognitive disorder
995.20 Other adverse effect of medication, Initial encounter
995.20 Other adverse effect of medication, Sequelae
995.20 Other adverse effect of me dication, Subsequent encounter
995.29 Antidepressant di scontinuation syndrome, Initial encounter
995.29 Antidepressant  discontinuation syndrome, Sequelae
995.29 Antidepressant disc ontinuation syndrome, Subsequent encounter
995.51 Child psychological abuse, Confirmed, Initial encounter
995.51 Child psychological abuse, Co nfirmed, Subsequent encounter
995.51 Child psychological abuse, Suspected, Initial encounter
995.51 Child psychological abuse, Su spected, Subsequent encounter
995.52 Child neglect, Confirmed, Initial encounter
995.52 Child neglect, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
995.52 Child neglect, Suspec ted, Initial encounter
995.52 Child neglect, Suspecte d, Subsequent encounter
995.53 Child sexual abuse, Co nfirmed, Init ial encounter
995.53 Child sexual abuse, Conf irmed, Subsequent encounter
995.53 Child sexual abuse, Su spected, Initial encounter
995.53 Child sexual ab use, Suspected, Subsequent encounter
995.54 Child physical abuse, Co nfirmed, Initial encounter
995.54 Child physical abuse, Conf irmed, Subsequent encounter
995.54 Child physical abuse, Su spected, Initial encounter
995.54 Child physical abuse, Susp ected, Subsequent encounter
995.81 Adult physical abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Confirmed, Initial encounter
995.81 Adult physical abuse by  nonspouse or nonpartner , Confirmed, Subsequent 
encounter
995.81 Adult physical abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Su spected, Initial encounter
995.81 Adult physical abuse by  nonspouse or nonpartner, Suspected, Subsequent 
encounterICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
874 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM)
995.81 Spouse or partner violence, Phys ical, Confirmed, Initial encounter
995.81 Spouse or partner violence, Physic al, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
995.81 Spouse or partner violence, Phys ical, Suspected, Initial encounter
995.81 Spouse or partner violence, Physic al, Suspected, Subsequent encounter
995.82 Adult psychological abuse by nonspo use or nonpartner, Confirmed, Initial 
encounter
995.82 Adult psychological abuse by no nspouse or nonpartner, Confirmed, 
Subsequent encounter
995.82 Adult psychological abuse by nonspo use or nonpartner, Suspected, Initial 
encounter
995.82 Adult psychological abuse by no nspouse or nonpartner, Suspected, 
Subsequent encounter
995.82 Spouse or partner abuse, Psycholo gical, Confirmed, Initial encounter
995.82 Spouse or partner abuse, Psychological, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
995.82 Spouse or partner abuse, Psycholo gical, Suspected, Initial encounter
995.82 Spouse or partner abuse, Psychologi cal, Suspected, Su bsequent encounter
995.83 Adult sexual abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Confirmed, Initial encounter
995.83 Adult sexual abuse by nonspouse or  nonpartner, Confirmed, Subsequent 
encounter
995.83 Adult sexual abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Suspected, Initial encounter
995.83 Adult sexual abuse by nonspouse or  nonpartner, Suspected, Subsequent 
encounter
995.83 Spouse or partner violence, Se xual, Confirmed, Initial encounter
995.83 Spouse or partner violence, Sexu al, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
995.83 Spouse or partner violence, Se xual, Suspected, Initial encounter
995.83 Spouse or partner violence, Sexu al, Suspected, Subsequent encounter
995.85 Spouse or partner neglect, Confirmed, Initial encounter
995.85 Spouse or partner neglect, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
995.85 Spouse or partner neglect,  Suspected, Initial encounter
995.85 Spouse or partner neglect, Suspected, Subsequent encounter
V15.41 Personal history (p ast history) of physical abuse in childhood
V15.41 Personal history (past history) of sexual abuse in childhood
V15.41 Personal history (pas t history) of spouse or partner violence, Physical
V15.41 Personal history (pas t history) of spouse or partner violence, Sexual
V15.42 Personal histor y (past history) of neglect in childhood
V15.42 Personal history (p ast history) of psychological abuse in childhood
V15.42 Personal history (past history) of spou se or partner neglect
V15.42 Personal history (pas t history) of spouse or partner psychological abuse
V15.49 Other personal history of psychological trauma
V15.59 Personal history of self-harm
V15.81 Nonadherence to medical treatment
V15.89 Other personal risk factors
V40.31 Wandering associated  with a mental disorder
V60.0 Homelessness
V60.1 Inadequate housing
V60.2 Extreme povertyICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM) 875
V60.2 Insufficient social in surance or welfare support
V60.2 Lack of adequate food or safe drinking water
V60.2 Low income
V60.3 Problem related to living alone
V60.6 Problem related to living in a residential institution
V60.89 Discord with neighbor, lodger, or landlord
V60.9 Unspecified housin g or economic problem
V61.03 Disruption of family by separation or divorce
V61.10 Relationship distress with spouse or intimate partner
V61.11 Encounter for mental health services for victim of spouse or partner neglect
V61.11 Encounter for mental health servic es for victim of spouse or partner 
psychological abuse
V61.11 Encounter for mental health services for victim of spouse or partner violence, 
Physical
V61.11 Encounter for mental health services for victim of spouse or partner violence, 
Sexual
V61.12 Encounter for mental health services  for perpetrator of spouse or partner 
neglect
V61.12 Encounter for mental health services  for perpetrator of spouse or partner 
psychological abuse
V61.12 Encounter for mental health services  for perpetrator of spouse or partner 
violence, Physical
V61.12 Encounter for mental health services  for perpetrator of spouse or partner 
violence, Sexual
V61.20 Parent-child relational problem
V61.21 Encounter for mental health servic es for victim of child abuse by parent
V61.21 Encounter for mental health services  for victim of child neglect by parent
V61.21 Encounter for mental health services for victim of child psychological abuse by 
parent
V61.21 Encounter for mental health services for victim of child sexual abuse by parent
V61.21 Encounter for mental health services  for victim of nonparental child abuse
V61.21 Encounter for mental health services  for victim of nonparental child neglect
V61.21 Encounter for mental health services for victim of nonparental child 
psychological abuse
V61.21 Encounter for mental health services  for victim of nonparental child sexual 
abuse
V61.22 Encounter for mental health services  for perpetrator of parental child abuse
V61.22 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of pa rental child neglect
V61.22 Encounter for mental health servic es for perpetrator of parental child 
psychological abuse
V61.22 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of pa rental chil d sexual 
abuse
V61.29 Child affected by parental relationship distress
V61.5 Problems related to multiparity
V61.7 Problems related to unwanted pregnancy
V61.8 High expressed emotion level within family
V61.8 Sibling relational problemICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
876 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-9-CM)
V61.8 Upbringing away from parents
V62.21 Problem related to current military deployment status
V62.22 Exposure to disaster, war, or other hostilities
V62.22 Personal history of military deployment
V62.29 Other problem related to employment
V62.3 Academic or educational problem
V62.4 Acculturation difficulty
V62.4 Social exclusion or rejection
V62.4 Target of (perceived) advers e discrimination or persecution
V62.5 Conviction in civil or crimin al proceedings wi thout imprisonment
V62.5 Imprisonment or other incarceration
V62.5 Problems related to other legal circumstances
V62.5 Problems related to release from prison
V62.82 Uncomplicated bereavement
V62.83 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of nonparental child abuse
V62.83 Encounter for mental health servic es for perpetrator of nonparental child 
neglect
V62.83 Encounter for mental health servic es for perpetrator of nonparental child 
psychological abuse
V62.83 Encounter for mental health servic es for perpetrator of nonparental child 
sexual abuse
V62.83 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of nonspousal adult abuse
V62.89 Borderline inte llectual functioning
V62.89 Discord with social service provider, including probation officer, case manager, 
or social services worker
V62.89 Other problem related to psychosocial circumstances
V62.89 Phase of life problem
V62.89 Religious or spiritual problem
V62.89 Victim of crime
V62.89 Victim of terrorism or torture
V62.9 Unspecified problem related to social environment
V62.9 Unspecified problem related to unspecified psychosocial circumstances
V63.8 Unavailability or inaccessibility of other helping agencies
V63.9 Unavailability or inaccessibility of health care facilities
V65.2 Malingering
V65.40 Other counseling or consultation
V65.49 Encounter for mental health services  for victim of nons pousal adult abuse
V65.49 Sex counseling
V69.9 Problem related to lifestyle
V71.01 Adult antisocial behavior
V71.02 Child or adolescent antisocial behaviorICD-9-CM Disorder, cond ition, or problem
877Numerical Listing of
 DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes
(ICD-10-CM)
ICD-10-CM codes are to be us ed for coding purposes in the United States starting 
October 1, 2014.
ICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
E66.9 Overweight or obesity
F01.50 Probable major vascular neurocognitive  disorder, Without be havioral disturbance
F01.51 Probable major vascular  neurocognitive di sorder, With beha vioral disturbance
F02.80 Major neurocognitive disorder du e to another medical condition, Without 
behavioral disturbance
F02.80 Major neurocognitive disorder du e to HIV infection, Without behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  B20 HIV infection)
F02.80 Major neurocognitive  disorder due to Hunting ton’s disease, Without 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  G10 Huntington’s disease)
F02.80 Major neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etio logies, Without behavioral 
disturbance
F02.80 Major neurocognitive disorder probably due to Parkinson’s disease, Without 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  G20 Parkinson’s disease)
F02.80 Major neurocognitive disorder du e to prion disease, Without behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  A81.9 prion disease)
F02.80 Major neurocognitive  disorder due to traumati c brain injury, Without 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  S06.2X9S diffuse traumatic brain injury 
with loss of consciousness of  unspecified duration, sequela)
F02.80 Probable major frontotemporal neuroc ognitive disorder, Without behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  G31.09 frontotemporal disease)
F02.80 Probable major neurocognitive diso rder due to Alzheimer’s disease, Without 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  G30.9 Alzheimer’s disease)
F02.80 Probable major neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies, Without 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  G31.83 Lewy body disease)
F02.81 Major neurocognitive disorder du e to another medical condition, With 
behavioral disturbance
F02.81 Major neurocognitive disorder du e to HIV infection, With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  B20 HIV infection)
F02.81 Major neurocognitive disorder due to Huntington’s disease, With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  G10 Huntington’s disease)
F02.81 Major neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies, With behavioral 
disturbance
878 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM)
F02.81 Major neurocognitive disorder probably due to Parkinson’s disease, With 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  G20 Parkinson’s disease)
F02.81 Major neurocognitive disorder du e to prion disease, With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  A81.9 prion disease)
F02.81 Major neurocognitive di sorder due to traumatic brain injury, With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  S06.2X9S diffuse traumatic brain injury with loss of 
consciousness of unspecified duration, sequela)
F02.81 Probable major frontotemporal neur ocognitive disorder , With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  G31.09 frontotemporal disease)
F02.81 Probable major neurocognitive diso rder due to Alzheimer’s disease, With 
behavioral disturbance ( code first  G30.9 Alzheimer’s disease)
F02.81 Probable major neurocognitive disord er with Lewy bodies, With behavioral 
disturbance ( code first  G31.83 Lewy body disease)
F05 Delirium due to another medical condition
F05 Delirium due to multiple etiologies
F06.0 Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition, With hallucinations
F06.1 Catatonia associated with another mental disord er (catatonia specifier)
F06.1 Catatonic disorder due to another medical condition
F06.1 Unspecified catatonia (code first  R29.818 other symptoms  involving nervous 
and musculoskeletal systems)
F06.2 Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition, With delusions
F06.31 Depressive disorder due to another medical condition, With depressive features
F06.32 Depressive disorder due to anoth er medical condition, With major 
depressive–like episode
F06.33 Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition, With manic features
F06.33 Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition, With manic- or 
hypomanic-like episodes
F06.34 Bipolar and related disorder due to another medical condition, With mixed 
features
F06.34 Depressive disorder due to another medical condition, With mixed features
F06.4 Anxiety disorder due to another medical condition
F06.8 Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to another medical condition 
F06.8 Other specified mental disorder due to another medical condition
F07.0 Personality change due to another medical condition
F09 Unspecified mental disorder due to another medical condition
F10.10 Alcohol use disorder, Mild
F10.121 Alcohol intoxication deli rium, With mild use disorder
F10.129 Alcohol intoxication , With mild use disorder
F10.14 Alcohol-induced bipolar and related disorder, With mild use disorder
F10.14 Alcohol-induced depressive disorder, With mild use disorder
F10.159 Alcohol-induced psychotic disorder, With mild use disorder
F10.180 Alcohol-induced anxiety di sorder, With mild use disorder
F10.181 Alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction, With mild use disorder
F10.182 Alcohol-induced sleep disorder, With mild use disorder
F10.20 Alcohol use disorder, Moderate
F10.20 Alcohol use disorder, Severe
F10.221 Alcohol intoxication delirium, Wi th moderate or severe use disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM) 879
F10.229 Alcohol intoxicati on, With moderate or severe use disorder
F10.231 Alcohol withdrawal delirium
F10.232 Alcohol withdrawal, Wi th perceptual disturbances
F10.239 Alcohol withdrawal, With out perceptual disturbances
F10.24 Alcohol-induced bipolar and related disorder, With moderate or severe use 
disorder
F10.24 Alcohol-induced depressive disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F10.259 Alcohol-induced psychotic disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F10.26 Alcohol-induced major neurocogniti ve disorder, Amnestic confabulatory 
type, With moderate or severe use disorder
F10.27 Alcohol-induced major neurocogniti ve disorder, Nonamnestic confabulatory 
type, With moderate or severe use disorder
F10.280 Alcohol-induced anxiety disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F10.281 Alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction, With moderate or severe use disorder
F10.282 Alcohol-induced sleep disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F10.288 Alcohol-induced mild neurocognitive disorder, With moderate or severe use 
disorder
F10.921 Alcohol intoxication delirium, Without use disorder
F10.929 Alcohol intoxicati on, Without use disorder
F10.94 Alcohol-induced bipolar and related disorder, Without use disorder
F10.94 Alcohol-induced depressive disorder, Without use disorder
F10.959 Alcohol-induced psychotic disorder, Without use disorder
F10.96 Alcohol-induced major neurocogniti ve disorder, Amnestic confabulatory 
type, Without use disorder
F10.97 Alcohol-induced major neurocogniti ve disorder, Nonamnestic confabulatory 
type, Without use disorder
F10.980 Alcohol-induced anxiety disorder, Without use disorder
F10.981 Alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction, Without use disorder
F10.982 Alcohol-induced sleep disorder, Without use disorder
F10.988 Alcohol-induced mild neurocognitive disorder, Without use disorder
F10.99 Unspecified alcohol-related disorder
F11.10 Opioid use disorder, Mild
F11.121 Opioid intoxication delirium, With mild use disorder
F11.122 Opioid intoxication, With perceptu al disturbances, With mild use disorder
F11.129 Opioid intoxication, Wi thout perceptual disturbanc es, With mild use disorder
F11.14 Opioid-induced depressive disorder, With mild use disorder
F11.181 Opioid-induced sexual dysfunction, With mild use disorder
F11.182 Opioid-induced sleep disorder, With mild use disorder
F11.188 Opioid-induced anxiety disorder, With mild use disorder
F11.20 Opioid use disorder, Moderate
F11.20 Opioid use disorder, Severe
F11.221 Opioid intoxication delirium, With moderate or severe use disorder
F11.222 Opioid intoxication, Wi th perceptual disturbances, With moderate or severe 
use disorder
F11.229 Opioid intoxication, Without percep tual disturbances, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F11.23 Opioid withdrawal ICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
880 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM)
F11.23 Opioid with drawal delirium
F11.24 Opioid-induced depressive disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F11.281 Opioid-induced sexual dysfunction,  With moderate or severe use disorder
F11.282 Opioid-induced sleep disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F11.288 Opioid-induced anxiet y disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F11.921 Opioid-induced delirium
F11.921 Opioid intoxication delirium, Without use disorder
F11.922 Opioid intoxication, With perceptual disturbances, Without use disorder
F11.929 Opioid intoxication, Without percep tual disturbances, Without use disorder
F11.94 Opioid-induced depressive disorder, Without use disorder
F11.981 Opioid-induced sexual dy sfunction, Without use disorder
F11.982 Opioid-induced sleep disorder, Without use disorder
F11.988 Opioid-induced anxiety disorder, Without use disorder
F11.99 Unspecified opioid-related disorder
F12.10 Cannabis use disorder, Mild
F12.121 Cannabis intoxication delirium, With mild use disorder
F12.122 Cannabis intoxication, With perceptu al disturbances, With mild use disorder
F12.129 Cannabis intoxication, Without percep tual disturbances, With mild use disorder
F12.159 Cannabis-induced psychotic disorder, With mild use disorder
F12.180 Cannabis-induced anxiety di sorder, With mild use disorder
F12.188 Cannabis-induced sleep disorder, With mild use disorder
F12.20 Cannabis use disorder, Moderate
F12.20 Cannabis use disorder, Severe
F12.221 Cannabis intoxication delirium, With moderate or severe use disorder
F12.222 Cannabis intoxication, Wi th perceptual dist urbances, With moderate or severe 
use disorder
F12.229 Cannabis intoxication, Without perceptual disturbances, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F12.259 Cannabis-induced psychotic disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F12.280 Cannabis-induced anxiet y disorder, With moderate  or severe use disorder
F12.288 Cannabis-induced sleep disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F12.288 Cannabis withdrawal 
F12.921 Cannabis intoxication delirium, Without use disorder
F12.922 Cannabis intoxication, With perceptual disturbances, Without use disorder
F12.929 Cannabis intoxica tion, Without percep tual disturbances, Without use disorder
F12.959 Cannabis-induced psychotic disorder, Without use disorder
F12.980 Cannabis-induced anxiety disorder, Without use disorder
F12.988 Cannabis-induced sleep disorder, Without use disorder
F12.99 Unspecified cannabis-related disorder
F13.10 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, Mild
F13.121 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication deli rium, With mild use disorder
F13.129 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic  intoxication, With mild use disorder
F13.14 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-i nduced bipolar and related disorder, With 
mild use disorder
F13.14 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder, With mild use 
disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM) 881
F13.159 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced psych otic disorder, With mild use 
disorder
F13.180 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic -induced anxiety disorder, With mild use 
disorder
F13.181 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced sexual dysfunction, With mild use 
disorder
F13.182 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-ind uced sleep disorder, Wi th mild use disorder
F13.20 Sedative, hypnotic, or an xiolytic use disorder, Moderate
F13.20 Sedative, hypnotic, or an xiolytic use disorder, Severe
F13.221 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic in toxication delirium, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F13.229 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication, With mo derate or severe use disorder
F13.231 Sedative, hypnotic, or an xiolytic withdrawal delirium
F13.232 Sedative, hypnotic, or  anxiolytic withdr awal, With perceptual disturbances
F13.239 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic wi thdrawal, Without perceptual disturbances
F13.24 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced bipolar and related disorder, With 
moderate or severe use disorder
F13.24 Sedative-, hypnotic-,  or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder, With 
moderate or severe use disorder
F13.259 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or  anxiolytic-induced  psychotic disorder, With moderate 
or severe use disorder
F13.27 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic -induced major neurocognitive disorder, 
With moderate or severe use disorder
F13.280 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-i nduced anxiety disorder, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F13.281 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or  anxiolytic-induced sexual dysfunction, With moderate 
or severe use disorder
F13.282 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced sleep disorder, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F13.288 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic -induced mild neuroc ognitive disorder, 
With moderate or severe use disorder
F13.921 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced delirium
F13.921 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic in toxication delirium, Without use disorder
F13.929 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolyt ic intoxication, Without use disorder
F13.94 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced bipolar and related disorder, 
Without use disorder
F13.94 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic -induced depressive disorder, Without use 
disorder
F13.959 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic -induced psychotic disorder, Without use 
disorder
F13.97 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic -induced major neurocognitive disorder, 
Without use disorder
F13.980 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-i nduced anxiety disorder, Without use disorder
F13.981 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic -induced sexual dysfunction, Without use 
disorder
F13.982 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-i nduced sleep disorder, Without use disorder
F13.988 Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic -induced mild neuroc ognitive disorder, 
Without use disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
882 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM)
F13.99 Unspecified sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related disorder
F14.10 Cocaine use disorder, Mild
F14.121 Cocaine intoxication delirium, With mild use disorder
F14.122 Cocaine intoxication, With perceptual disturbances, With mild use disorder
F14.129 Cocaine intoxication, Wi thout perceptual disturbances, With mild use disorder
F14.14 Cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder, With mild use disorder
F14.14 Cocaine-induced depressive disorder, With mild use disorder
F14.159 Cocaine-induced psychotic disorder, With mild use disorder
F14.180 Cocaine-induced anxiety disorder, With mild use disorder
F14.181 Cocaine-induced sexual dysfunction, With mild use disorder
F14.182 Cocaine-induced sleep disorder, With mild use disorder
F14.188 Cocaine-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, With mild use 
disorder
F14.20 Cocaine use disorder, Moderate
F14.20 Cocaine use disorder, Severe
F14.221 Cocaine intoxication delirium, With moderate or severe use disorder
F14.222 Cocaine intoxication, Wi th perceptual disturbances, With moderate or severe 
use disorder
F14.229 Cocaine intoxication, Without perceptual disturbances, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F14.23 Cocaine withdrawal
F14.24 Cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder, With moderate or severe use 
disorder
F14.24 Cocaine-induced depressive disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F14.259 Cocaine-induced psychotic disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F14.280 Cocaine-induced anxiety disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F14.281 Cocaine-induced sexual dysfunction,  With moderate or severe use disorder
F14.282 Cocaine-induced sleep disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F14.288 Cocaine-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, With moderate 
or severe use disorder
F14.921 Cocaine intoxication de lirium, Without use disorder
F14.922 Cocaine intoxication, With perceptual disturba nces, Without use disorder
F14.929 Cocaine intoxication, Without perceptual disturba nces, Without use disorder
F14.94 Cocaine-induced bipolar and related disorder, Without use disorder
F14.94 Cocaine-induced depressive disorder, Without use disorder
F14.959 Cocaine-induced psychotic disorder, Without use disorder
F14.980 Cocaine-induced anxiety disorder, Without use disorder
F14.981 Cocaine-induced sexual dysfunction, Without use disorder
F14.982 Cocaine-induced sleep disorder, Without use disorder
F14.988 Cocaine-induced obsessive-compulsive and related disorder, Without use disorder
F14.99 Unspecified stimulant-related disorder, Unspecified Cocaine-related disorder
F15.10 Amphetamine-type su bstance use disorder, Mild
F15.10 Other or unspecified stimulant use disorder, Mild
F15.121 Amphetamine (or other stimulant) intoxication delirium, With mild use disorder
F15.122 Amphetamine or other stimulant intoxication, With perceptual disturbances, 
With mild use disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM) 883
F15.129 Amphetamine or ot her stimulant intoxicatio n, Without perceptual 
disturbances, With mild use disorder
F15.14 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–i nduced bipolar and related disorder, 
With mild use disorder
F15.14 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced depressive disorder, With mild 
use disorder
F15.159 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–ind uced psychotic disorder, With mild use 
disorder
F15.180 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–i nduced anxiety disorder, With mild use 
disorder
F15.180 Caffeine-induced anxiety disorder, With mild use disorder
F15.181 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced sexual dysfunction, With mild 
use disorder
F15.182 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induc ed sleep disorder, With mild use disorder
F15.182 Caffeine-induced sleep disorder, With mild use disorder
F15.188 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced obsessive-compulsive and related 
disorder, With mild use disorder
F15.20 Amphetamine-type subs tance use disorder, Moderate
F15.20 Amphetamine-type subs tance use disorder, Severe
F15.20 Other or unspecified st imulant use disorder, Moderate
F15.20 Other or unspecified st imulant use disorder, Severe
F15.221 Amphetamine (or other stimulant) intoxication delirium, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F15.222 Amphetamine or other stimulant intoxication, With perceptual disturbances, 
With moderate or severe use disorder
F15.229 Amphetamine or ot her stimulant intoxicatio n, Without perceptual 
disturbances, With moderate or severe use disorder
F15.23 Amphetamine or ot her stimulan t withdrawal
F15.24 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–i nduced bipolar and related disorder, 
With moderate or severe use disorder
F15.24 Amphetamine (or other stimulant) –induced depressive disorder, With 
moderate or severe use disorder
F15.259 Amphetamine (or other stimulant) –induced psychoti c disorder, With 
moderate or severe use disorder
F15.280 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced anxiety disorder, With moderate 
or severe use disorder
F15.280 Caffeine-induced anxiety disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F15.281 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced sexual dy sfunction, With 
moderate or severe use disorder
F15.282 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced sleep disorder, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F15.282 Caffeine-induced sleep disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F15.288 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced obsessive-compulsive and related 
disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F15.921 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced delirium
F15.921 Amphetamine (or other stimulant) intoxication deli rium, Without use disorder
F15.922 Amphetamine or other stimulant intoxication, With perceptual disturbances, 
Without use disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
884 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM)
F15.929 Amphetamine or ot her stimulant intoxicatio n, Without perceptual 
disturbances, Without use disorder
F15.929 Caffeine intoxication 
F15.93 Caffeine withdrawal 
F15.94 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–i nduced bipolar and related disorder, 
Without use disorder
F15.94 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced depressive disorder, Without use 
disorder
F15.959 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–i nduced psychotic disorder, Without use 
disorder
F15.980 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–i nduced anxiety disorder, Without use 
disorder
F15.980 Caffeine-induced anxiety disorder, Without use disorder
F15.981 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced sexual dysfunction, Without use 
disorder
F15.982 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–ind uced sleep disorder, Without use disorder
F15.982 Caffeine-induced sleep disorder, Without use disorder
F15.988 Amphetamine (or other stimulant)–induced obsessive-compulsive and related 
disorder, Without use disorder
F15.99 Unspecified amphetamine or other stimulant-related disorder
F15.99 Unspecified caffeine-related disorder
F16.10 Other hallucinogen use disorder, Mild
F16.10 Phencyclidine use disorder, Mild
F16.121 Other hallucinogen intoxication  delirium, With mild use disorder
F16.121 Phencyclidine intoxication delirium, With mild use disorder
F16.129 Other hallucinogen intoxi cation, With mi ld use disorder
F16.129 Phencyclidine intoxication, With mild use disorder
F16.14 Other hallucinogen–induced bipolar and related disorder, With mild use disorder
F16.14 Other hallucinogen–ind uced depressive disorder, With mild use disorder
F16.14 Phencyclidine-induced bipolar and related disorder, With mild use disorder
F16.14 Phencyclidine-induced depressive  disorder, With mild use disorder
F16.159 Other hallucinogen–i nduced psychotic disorder, With mild use disorder
F16.159 Phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder, With mild use disorder
F16.180 Other hallucinogen–i nduced anxiety disorder, With mild use disorder
F16.180 Phencyclidine-indu ced anxiety disorder, With mild use disorder
F16.20 Other hallucinogen  use disorder, Moderate
F16.20 Other hallucinogen  use disorder, Severe
F16.20 Phencycl idine use disorder, Moderate
F16.20 Phencyclidine use disorder, Severe
F16.221 Other hallucinogen intoxication delirium, With moderate or severe use disorder
F16.221 Phencyclidine intoxication delirium, With moderate or severe use disorder
F16.229 Other hallucinogen intoxication, With moderate or severe use disorder
F16.229 Phencyclidine intoxication, With moderate or severe use disorder
F16.24 Other hallucinogen–ind uced bipolar and related disorder, With moderate or 
severe use disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM) 885
F16.24 Other hallucinogen–ind uced depressive disorder, With moderate or severe 
use disorder
F16.24 Phencyclidine-induced bipolar and related disorder, With moderate or severe 
use disorder
F16.24 Phencyclidine-induced depressive disord er, With moderate or severe use disorder
F16.259 Other hallucinog en–induced psychotic disorder, With moderate or severe use 
disorder
F16.259 Phencyclidine-induced psychotic disord er, With moderate or severe use disorder
F16.280 Other hallucinogen–ind uced anxiety disorder, With  moderate or severe use 
disorder
F16.280 Phencyclidine-induced anxiety disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F16.921 Other hallucinogen intoxication delirium, Without use disorder
F16.921 Phencyclidine intoxication delirium, Without use disorder
F16.929 Other hallucinogen intoxication, Without use disorder
F16.929 Phencyclidine intoxicat ion, Without use disorder
F16.94 Other hallucinogen–induced bipolar and related disorder, Without use disorder
F16.94 Other hallucinogen–i nduced depressive disorder, Without use disorder
F16.94 Phencyclidine-induced bipolar and related disorder, Without use disorder
F16.94 Phencyclidine-induced depressive disorder, Without use disorder
F16.959 Other hallucinogen–i nduced psychotic disord er, Without use disorder
F16.959 Phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder, Without use disorder
F16.980 Other hallucinogen –induced anxiety disord er, Without use disorder
F16.980 Phencyclidine-in duced anxiety disorder , Without use disorder
F16.983 Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder 
F16.99 Unspecified halluc inogen-related disorder
F16.99 Unspecified phencyclidine-related disorder
F17.200 Tobacco use disorder, Moderate
F17.200 Tobacco use disorder, Severe
F17.203 Tobacco withdrawal
F17.208 Tobacco-induced sleep disorder, Wi th moderate or severe use disorder
F17.209 Unspecified tobac co-related disorder
F18.10 Inhalant use disorder, Mild
F18.121 Inhalant intoxication delirium, With mild use disorder
F18.129 Inhalant intoxication,  With mild use disorder
F18.14 Inhalant-induced depressive disorder, With mild use disorder
F18.159 Inhalant-induced psychotic disorder, With mild use disorder
F18.17 Inhalant-induced major neurocogni tive disorder, With mild use disorder
F18.180 Inhalant-induced anxiety di sorder, With mild use disorder
F18.188 Inhalant-induced mild neurocognitive disorder, With mild use disorder
F18.20 Inhalant use disorder, Moderate
F18.20 Inhalant use disorder, Severe
F18.221 Inhalant intoxication delirium, With moderate or severe use disorder
F18.229 Inhalant intoxication, With moderate or severe use disorder
F18.24 Inhalant-induced depressive disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F18.259 Inhalant-induced psychotic disorder, With moderate or severe use disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
886 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM)
F18.27 Inhalant-induced major neurocognitive  disorder, With moderate or severe use 
disorder
F18.280 Inhalant-induced anxiety disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F18.288 Inhalant-induced mild neurocognitive  disorder, With mode rate or severe use 
disorder
F18.921 Inhalant intoxication delirium, Without use disorder
F18.929 Inhalant intoxicatio n, Without use disorder
F18.94 Inhalant-induced depressive disorder, Without use disorder
F18.959 Inhalant-induced  psychotic disorder, Without use disorder
F18.97 Inhalant-induced major neurocog nitive disorder, Wi thout use disorder
F18.980 Inhalant-induced anxiety disorder, Without use disorder
F18.988 Inhalant-induced mild neurocogni tive disorder, Without use disorder
F18.99 Unspecified inhalant-related disorder
F19.10 Other (or unknown) su bstance use disorder, Mild
F19.121 Other (or unknown) substance intoxi cation delirium, With  mild use disorder
F19.129 Other (or unknown) substance in toxication, With mild use disorder
F19.14 Other (or unknown) substance–induced bipolar and related disorder, With 
mild use disorder
F19.14 Other (or unknown) substance–induced depressive disorder, With mild use 
disorder
F19.159 Other (or unknown) substance–indu ced psychotic disorder, With mild use 
disorder
F19.17 Other (or unknown) substance–induce d major neurocogniti ve disorder, With 
mild use disorder
F19.180 Other (or unknown) substance–induced anxiety disorder, With mild use disorder
F19.181 Other (or unknown) substance–induced sexual dysfunction, With mild use 
disorder
F19.182 Other (or unknown) substance–induced sleep disorder, With mild use disorder
F19.188 Other (or unknown) substance–induce d mild neurocognitive disorder, With 
mild use disorder
F19.188 Other (or unknown) substance–induced obsessive-compulsive and related 
disorder, With mild use disorder
F19.20 Other (or unknown) substance use disorder, Moderate
F19.20 Other (or unknown) su bstance use disorder, Severe
F19.221 Other (or unknown) subs tance intoxication delirium, With moderate or severe 
use disorder
F19.229 Other (or unknown) substance intoxication, With moderate or severe use disorder
F19.231 Other (or unknown) su bstance withdrawal delirium
F19.239 Other (or unknown) substance withdrawal 
F19.24 Other (or unknown) substance–induced bipolar and related disorder, With 
moderate or seve re use disorder
F19.24 Other (or unknown) substance–induced depressive disorder, With moderate 
or severe use disorder
F19.259 Other (or unknown) substance–induce d psychotic disorder, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F19.27 Other (or unknown) substance–induce d major neurocogniti ve disorder, With 
moderate or seve re use disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM) 887
F19.280 Other (or unknown) substance–induce d anxiety disorder, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F19.281 Other (or unknown) substance–induced sexual dysfunction, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F19.282 Other (or unknown) substance–indu ced sleep disorder, With moderate or 
severe use disorder
F19.288 Other (or unknown) substance–induce d mild neurocognitive disorder, With 
moderate or severe use disorder
F19.288 Other (or unknown) substance–induced obsessive-compulsive and related 
disorder, With moderate or severe use disorder
F19.921 Other (or unknown) substance–induced delirium
F19.921 Other (or unknown) substance into xication delirium, Without use disorder
F19.929 Other (or unknown) substance intoxication, With out use disorder
F19.94 Other (or unknown) substance–induced bipolar and related disorder, Without 
use disorder
F19.94 Other (or unknown) subs tance–induced depressive disorder, Without use disorder
F19.959 Other (or unknown) substance–induced psychotic disorder, Without use disorder
F19.97 Other (or unknown) substance–in duced major neurocognitive disorder, 
Without use disorder
F19.980 Other (or unknown) substance–induced anxiety disorder, Without use disorder
F19.981 Other (or unknown) substance–induced sexual dysfunction, Without use disorder
F19.982 Other (or unknown) substance–indu ced sleep disorder, Without use disorder
F19.988 Other (or unknown) substance–induced mild neurocognitive disorder, 
Without use disorder
F19.988 Other (or unknown) substance–induced obsessive-compulsive and related 
disorder, Without use disorder
F19.99 Unspecified other (or unknow n) substance–related disorder 
F20.81 Schizophreniform disorder
F20.9 Schizophrenia
F21 Schizotypal personality disorder
F22 Delusional disorder
F23 Brief psychotic disorder
F25.0 Schizoaffective disorder, Bipolar type
F25.1 Schizoaffective disorder, Depressive type
F28 Other specified schizophrenia sp ectrum and other psychotic disorder
F29 Unspecified schizophrenia spec trum and other psychotic disorder
F31.0 Bipolar I disorder, Current or  most recent episode hypomanic
F31.11 Bipolar I disorder , Current or most rece nt episode manic, Mild
F31.12 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode manic, Moderate
F31.13 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode manic, Severe
F31.2 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most re cent episode manic, Wi th psychotic features
F31.31 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode depressed, Mild
F31.32 Bipolar I disorder, Cu rrent or most recent episode depressed, Moderate
F31.4 Bipolar I disorder, Current or mo st recent episode depressed, Severe
F31.5 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode depressed, With psychotic 
featuresICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
888 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM)
F31.71 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most rece nt episode hypomanic, In partial remission
F31.72 Bipolar I disorder, Curr ent or most recent episode hypomanic, In full remission
F31.73 Bipolar I disorder, Curre nt or most recent episode manic, In partial remission
F31.74 Bipolar I disorder, Curre nt or most recent episode manic, In full remission
F31.75 Bipolar I disorder, Current  or most recent episode depressed, In partial remission
F31.76 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode depressed, In full remission
F31.81 Bipolar II disorder
F31.89 Other specified bipolar and related disorder
F31.9 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode depressed, Unspecified
F31.9 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most  recent episode hypomanic, Unspecified
F31.9 Bipolar I disorder, Current or mo st recent episode manic, Unspecified
F31.9 Bipolar I disorder, Current or most recent episode unspecified 
F31.9 Unspecified bipolar and related disorder
F32.0 Major depressive disorder, Single episode, Mild
F32.1 Major depressive disorder, Single episode, Moderate
F32.2 Major depressive disorder, Single episode, Severe 
F32.3 Major depressive disorder, Single episode, With psychotic features
F32.4 Major depressive disorder, Single episode, In partial remission
F32.5 Major depressive disorder, Single episode, In full remission
F32.8 Other specified depressive disorder
F32.9 Major depressive disorder, Single episode, Unspecifed
F32.9 Unspecified depressive disorder
F33.0 Major depressive disorde r, Recurrent episode, Mild
F33.1 Major depressive disorder,  Recurrent episode, Moderate
F33.2 Major depressive disorder, Recurrent episode, Severe 
F33.3 Major depressive disorder, Recurre nt episode, With psychotic features
F33.41 Major depressive disorder, Recurrent episode, In partial remission
F33.42 Major depressive disorder, Recurrent episode, In full remission
F33.9 Major depressive disorder, Recurrent episode, Unspecified
F34.0 Cyclothymic disorder 
F34.1 Persistent depressi ve disorder (dysthymia)
F34.8 Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder 
F40.00 Agoraphobia
F40.10 Social anxiety disorder (social phobia)
F40.218 Specific phobia, Animal
F40.228 Specific phobia, Natural environment
F40.230 Specific phobia, Fear of blood
F40.231 Specific phobia, Fear of injections and transfusions
F40.232 Specific phobia, Fear of other medical care
F40.233 Specific phobia, Fear of injury
F40.248 Specific phobia, Situational 
F40.298 Specific phobia, Other
F41.0 Panic disorder 
F41.1 Generalized anxiety disorder 
F41.8 Other specified anxiety disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM) 889
F41.9 Unspecified anxiety disorder
F42 Hoarding disorder
F42 Obsessive-compulsive disorder
F42 Other specified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
F42 Unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related disorder
F43.0 Acute stress disorder 
F43.10 Posttraumatic stress disorder
F43.20 Adjustment disorders, Unspecified
F43.21 Adjustment disorder s, With depressed mood
F43.22 Adjustment diso rders, With anxiety
F43.23 Adjustment disorders, With  mixed anxiety and depressed mood
F43.24 Adjustment disorders, With disturbance of conduct
F43.25 Adjustment disorders,  With mixed disturbance of emotions and conduct
F43.8 Other specified trauma- and stressor-related disorder
F43.9 Unspecified trauma- an d stressor-related disorder
F44.0 Dissociative amnesia
F44.1 Dissociative amnesia, With dissociative fugue
F44.4 Conversion disorder (functional ne urological symptom disorder), With 
abnormal movement
F44.4 Conversion disorder (functional ne urological symptom disorder), With 
speech symptoms 
F44.4 Conversion disorder (functional ne urological symptom disorder), With 
swallowing symptoms
F44.4 Conversion disorder (functional ne urological symptom disorder), With 
weakness/paralysis
F44.5 Conversion disorder (functional ne urological symptom disorder), With 
attacks or seizures
F44.6 Conversion disorder (functional ne urological symptom disorder), With 
anesthesia or sensory loss
F44.6 Conversion disorder (functional ne urological symptom disorder), With 
special sensory symptoms 
F44.7 Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder), With mixed 
symptoms
F44.81 Dissociative identity disorder
F44.89 Other specified dissociative disorder
F44.9 Unspecified diss ociative disorder 
F45.1 Somatic sy mptom disorder
F45.21 Illness anxiety disorder
F45.22 Body dysmorphic disorder
F45.8 Other specified somatic symptom and related disorder
F45.9 Unspecified somatic symptom and related disorder
F48.1 Depersonalization/ derealization disorder
F50.01 Anorexia nervosa, Restricting type
F50.02 Anorexia nervosa, Binge-eating/purging type
F50.2 Bulimia nervosa
F50.8 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
890 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM)
F50.8 Binge-eating disorder
F50.8 Other specified feeding or eating disorder
F50.8 Pica, in adults
F50.9 Unspecified feeding or eating disorder
F51.01 Insomnia disorder
F51.11 Hypersomno lence disorder
F51.3 Non–rapid eye movement sleep arousal disorders, Sleepwalking type
F51.4 Non–rapid eye movement sleep arousal disorders,  Sleep terror type
F51.5 Nightmare disorder
F52.0 Male hypoactive se xual desire disorder
F52.21 Erectile disorder
F52.22 Female sexual in terest/arous al disorder
F52.31 Female orgasmic disorder
F52.32 Delayed ejaculation
F52.4 Premature (early) ejaculation
F52.6 Genito-pelvic pain /penetration disorder
F52.8 Other specified sexual dysfunction
F52.9 Unspecified sexual dysfunction
F54 Psychological factors affe cting other medical conditions
F60.0 Paranoid personality disorder
F60.1 Schizoid personality disorder
F60.2 Antisocial personality disorder
F60.3 Borderline personality disorder
F60.4 Histrionic personality disorder
F60.5 Obsessive-compulsiv e personality disorder
F60.6 Avoidant personality disorder
F60.7 Dependent personality disorder
F60.81 Narcissistic personality disorder
F60.89 Other specified personality disorder
F60.9 Unspecified pe rsonality disorder
F63.0 Gambling disorder
F63.1 Pyromania
F63.2 Kleptomania 
F63.3 Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder)
F63.81 Intermittent explosive disorder 
F64.1 Gender dysphoria in  adolescents and adults
F64.2 Gender dysphoria in children
F64.8 Other specified gender dysphoria
F64.9 Unspecified gender dysphoria
F65.0 Fetishistic disorder
F65.1 Transvestic disorder
F65.2 Exhibitionistic disorder
F65.3 Voyeuristic disorder
F65.4 Pedophilic disorder
F65.51 Sexual ma sochism disorder
F65.52 Sexual sadism disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM) 891
F65.81 Frotteuristic disorder
F65.89 Other specified paraphilic disorder
F65.9 Unspecified pa raphilic disorder
F68.10 Factitious disorder
F70 Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), Mild
F71 Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), Moderate
F72 Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), Severe
F73 Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder), Profound
F79 Unspecified intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder)
F80.0 Speech sound disorder
F80.2 Language disorder
F80.81 Childhood-onset flue ncy disorder (stuttering)
F80.89 Social (pragmatic ) communication disorder
F80.9 Unspecified communication disorder
F81.0 Specific learning disorder , With impairment in reading
F81.2 Specific learning disorder, With impairment in mathematics
F81.81 Specific learning disorder, With impairment in written expression
F82 Developmental coordination disorder 
F84.0 Autism spectrum disorder
F88 Global developmental delay
F88 Other specified neurodevelopmental disorder
F89 Unspecified neurod evelopmental disorder
F90.0 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disord er, Predominantly inattentive presentation
F90.1 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, Predominantly hyperactive/
impulsive presentation
F90.2 Attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder, Combined presentation
F90.8 Other specified attention- deficit/hyperactivity disorder
F90.9 Unspecified attention-de ficit/hyperactivity disorder
F91.1 Conduct disorder, Childhood-onset type
F91.2 Conduct disorder, Adolescent-onset type
F91.3 Oppositional defiant disorder
F91.8 Other specified disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder
F91.9 Conduct disorder, Unspecified onset
F91.9 Unspecified disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorder
F93.0 Separation anxiety disorder 
F94.0 Selective mutism
F94.1 Reactive attachment disorder
F94.2 Disinhibited social  engagement disorder
F95.0 Provisional tic disorder 
F95.1 Persistent (chronic) motor or vocal tic disorder
F95.2 Tourette’s disorder 
F95.8 Other specified tic disorder
F95.9 Unspecified tic disorder
F98.0 Enuresis
F98.1 Encopresis
F98.21 Rumination disorderICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
892 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM)
F98.3 Pica, in children
F98.4 Stereotypic movement disorder
F98.5 Adult-onset fluency disorder
F99 Other specified mental disorder
F99 Unspecified mental disorder
G21.0 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome
G21.11 Neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism
G21.19 Other medication -induced parkinsonism
G24.01 Tardive dyskinesia
G24.02 Medication-ind uced acute dystonia
G24.09 Tardive dystonia
G25.1 Medication-induced postural tremor
G25.71 Medication-induc ed acute akathisia
G25.71 Tardiv e akathisia
G25.79 Other medication-induced movement disorder
G25.81 Restless legs syndrome
G31.84 Mild frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder
G31.84 Mild neurocogni tive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease
G31.84 Mild neurocogniti ve disorder due to another medical condition
G31.84 Mild neurocognitive di sorder due to HIV infection
G31.84 Mild neurocogni tive disorder due to Huntington’s disease
G31.84 Mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies
G31.84 Mild neurocognitive disorder due to multiple etiologies
G31.84 Mild neurocogni tive disorder due to Parkinson’s disease
G31.84 Mild neurocognitive di sorder due to prion disease
G31.84 Mild neurocognitive disord er due to traumatic brain injury
G31.84 Mild vascular ne urocognitive disorder
G31.9 Major neurocognitive disorder possibly due to Parkinson’s disease
G31.9 Possible major frontotemp oral neurocognitive disorder
G31.9 Possible major neurocognitive disorder due to Alzheimer’s disease
G31.9 Possible major neurocogniti ve disorder wi th Lewy bodies
G31.9 Possible major vascular  neurocogniti ve disorder
G47.00 Unspecified insomnia disorder
G47.09 Other specified insomnia disorder
G47.10 Unspecified hypersomnolence disorder
G47.19 Other specified hypersomnolence disorder
G47.20 Circadian rhythm sleep-wak e disorders, Unspecified type
G47.21 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake di sorders, Delayed sleep phase type
G47.22 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake di sorders, Advanced sleep phase type
G47.23 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake di sorders, Irregula r sleep-wake type
G47.24 Circadian rhythm sleep-wake di sorders, Non-24-hour sleep-wake type
G47.26 Circadian rhythm sleep-wak e disorders, Shift work type
G47.31 Central sleep apnea, Id iopathic central sleep apneaICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM) 893
G47.33 Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea
G47.34 Sleep-related hypoventilation, Idiopathic hypoventilation
G47.35 Sleep-related hypoventilation, Cong enital central alveolar hypoventilation
G47.36 Sleep-related hypoventilation, Comorbid sleep-related hypoventilation
G47.37 Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use
G47.411 Narcolepsy with cataplexy but without hypocretin deficiency
G47.419 Autosomal dominant cerebellar  ataxia, deafness, and narcolepsy
G47.419 Autosomal dominant narcolep sy, obesity, and type 2 diabetes
G47.419 Narcolepsy without cataple xy but with hypocretin deficiency
G47.429 Narcolepsy secondary to another medical condition
G47.52 Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder
G47.8 Other specified sleep-wake disorder
G47.9 Unspecified sleep-wake disorder
L98.1  Excoriation (skin-picking) disorder
N39.498 Other specified elimination disorder, With urinary symptoms
N94.3 Premenstrual dysphoric disorder 
R06.3 Central sleep apnea, Cheyne-Stokes breathing
R15.9 Other specified elimination disorder, With fecal symptoms
R15.9 Unspecified elimination disorder, With fecal symptoms
R32 Unspecified elimination disorder, With urinary symptoms
R41.0 Other specified delirium
R41.0 Unspecified delirium
R41.83 Borderline intellectual functioning
R41.9 Unspecified neur ocognitive disorder
T43.205A Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome, Initial encounter
T43.205D Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome, Subsequent encounter
T43.205S Antidepressant discont inuation syndrome, Sequelae
T50.905A Other adverse effect of medication, Initial encounter
T50.905D Other adverse effect of medication, Subsequent encounter
T50.905S Other adverse effect of medication, Sequelae
T74.01XA Spouse or partner neglect, Confirmed, Initial encounter
T74.01XD Spouse or partner neglect,  Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
T74.02XA Child neglect, Confirmed, Initial encounter
T74.02XD Child neglect, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
T74.11XA Adult physical abuse by nonspouse or  nonpartner, Confirme d, Initial encounter
T74.11XA Spouse or partner violence, Physical, Confirmed, Initial encounter
T74.11XD Adult physical abus e by nonspouse or nonpartn er, Confirmed, Subsequent 
encounter
T74.11XD Spouse or partner violence, Phys ical, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
T74.12XA Child physical abuse, Confirmed, Initial encounter
T74.12XD Child physical abuse, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
T74.21XA Adult sexual abuse by nonspouse or  nonpartner, Confirmed, Initial encounter
T74.21XA Spouse or partner violence, Sexual, Confirmed, Initial encounter
T74.21XD Adult sexual abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Confirmed, Subsequent 
encounterICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
894 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM)
T74.21XD Spouse or partner violence, Se xual, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
T74.22XA Child sexual abuse, Confirmed, Initial encounter
T74.22XD Child sexual abuse, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
T74.31XA Adult psychological abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Confirmed, Initial 
encounter
T74.31XA Spouse or partner abuse, Psycho logical, Confirmed, Initial encounter
T74.31XD Adult psychological abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Confirmed, 
Subsequent encounter
T74.31XD Spouse or partner abuse, Psycholo gical, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
T74.32XA Child psychological abuse, Confirmed, Initial encounter
T74.32XD Child psychological abuse, Confirmed, Subsequent encounter
T76.01XA Spouse or partner neglec t, Suspected, Initial encounter
T76.01XD Spouse or partner neglect,  Suspected, Subsequent encounter
T76.02XA Child neglect, Suspected, Initial encounter
T76.02XD Child neglect, Suspected, Subsequent encounter
T76.11XA Adult physical abuse by nonspouse or  nonpartner, Suspected, Initial encounter
T76.11XA Spouse or partner violence, Ph ysical, Suspected, Initial encounter
T76.11XD Adult physical abus e by nonspouse or nonpartn er, Suspected, Subsequent 
encounter
T76.11XD Spouse or partner violence, Phys ical, Suspected, Subsequent encounter
T76.12XA Child physical abuse, Suspected, Initial encounter
T76.12XD Child physical abuse, Suspected, Subsequent encounter
T76.21XA Adult sexual abuse by nonspouse or  nonpartner, Suspected, Initial encounter
T76.21XA Spouse or partner violence, Sexual, Suspected, Initial encounter
T76.21XD Adult sexual abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Suspected, Subsequent 
encounter
T76.21XD Spouse or partner violence, Se xual, Suspected, Subsequent encounter
T76.22XA Child sexual abuse, Suspected, Initial encounter
T76.22XD Child sexual abuse, Su spected, Subsequent encounter
T76.31XA Adult psychological abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Suspected, Initial 
encounter
T76.31XA Spouse or partner abuse, Psychological, Suspected, Initial encounter
T76.31XD Adult psychological abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, Suspected, 
Subsequent encounter
T76.31XD Spouse or partner abuse, Psychological, Suspected, Subsequent encounter
T76.32XA Child psychological abuse, Suspected, Initial encounter
T76.32XD Child psychological abuse, Suspected, Subsequent encounter
Z55.9 Academic or educational problem
Z56.82 Problem related to current military deployment status
Z56.9 Other problem related to employment
Z59.0 Homelessness
Z59.1 Inadequate housing
Z59.2 Discord with neighbor, lodger, or landlord
Z59.3 Problem related to living in a residential institution
Z59.4 Lack of adequate food or safe drinking water
Z59.5 Extreme povertyICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM) 895
Z59.6 Low income
Z59.7 Insufficient social insurance or welfare support
Z59.9 Unspecified housin g or economic problem
Z60.0 Phase of life problem
Z60.2 Problem related to living alone
Z60.3 Acculturation difficulty
Z60.4 Social exclusion or rejection
Z60.5 Target of (perceived) advers e discrimination or persecution
Z60.9 Unspecified problem related to social environment
Z62.29 Upbringing away from parents
Z62.810 Personal history (past histor y) of physical abuse in childhood
Z62.810 Personal history (past history) of sexual abuse in childhood
Z62.811 Personal history (past history)  of psychological abuse in childhood
Z62.812 Personal history (past history) of neglect in childhood
Z62.820 Parent-child relational problem
Z62.891 Sibling relational problem
Z62.898 Child affected by pa rental relationship distress
Z63.0 Relationship distress with  spouse or intimate partner
Z63.4 Uncomplicated bereavement
Z63.5 Disruption of family by separation or divorce
Z63.8 High expressed emotion level within family
Z64.0 Problems related to unwanted pregnancy
Z64.1 Problems related to multiparity
Z64.4 Discord with social service provider, including probation officer, case 
manager, or social services worker
Z65.0 Conviction in civil or crimin al proceedings without imprisonment
Z65.1 Imprisonment or other incarceration
Z65.2 Problems related to release from prison
Z65.3 Problems related to ot her legal circumstances
Z65.4 Victim of crime
Z65.4 Victim of terrorism or torture
Z65.5 Exposure to disaster, war, or other hostilities
Z65.8 Other problem related to psychosocial circumstances
Z65.8 Religious or spiritual problem
Z65.9 Unspecified problem related to unspecified psychosocial circumstances
Z69.010 Encounter for mental health services fo r victim of child abuse by parent
Z69.010 Encounter for mental health services for victim of child neglect by parent
Z69.010 Encounter for mental health services for victim of child psychological abuse by 
parent
Z69.010 Encounter for mental he alth services for victim of child sexual abuse by parent
Z69.011 Encounter for mental health services fo r perpetrator of parental child abuse
Z69.011 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator  of parental child neglect
Z69.011 Encounter for mental health serv ices for perpetrator of parental child 
psychological abuse
Z69.011 Encounter for mental heal th services for perpetrator of parental child sexual abuse
Z69.020 Encounter for mental health services fo r victim of nonparental child abuseICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
896 Numerical Listing of DSM-5 Diagnoses and Codes (ICD-10-CM)
Z69.020 Encounter for mental health services fo r victim of nonparental child neglect
Z69.020 Encounter for mental health services fo r victim of nonparental child psycho-
logical abuse
Z69.020 Encounter for mental he alth services for victim of nonparental child sexual abuse
Z69.021 Encounter for mental he alth services for perpetrato r of nonparental child abuse
Z69.021 Encounter for mental he alth services for perpetrator of nonparental child neglect
Z69.021 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of nonparental child 
psychological abuse
Z69.021 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of nonparental child 
sexual abuse
Z69.11 Encounter for mental health services for victim of spouse or partner neglect
Z69.11 Encounter for mental health servic es for victim of spouse or partner 
psychological abuse
Z69.11 Encounter for mental health services for victim of spouse or partner violence, 
Physical
Z69.12 Encounter for mental heal th services for perpetrator of spouse or partner neglect
Z69.12 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of spouse or partner 
psychological abuse
Z69.12 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of spouse or partner 
violence, Physical
Z69.12 Encounter for mental health services for perpetrator of spouse or partner 
violence, Sexual
Z69.81 Encounter for mental health services  for victim of nonspousal adult abuse
Z69.81 Encounter for mental health services for victim of spouse or partner violence, 
Sexual
Z69.82 Encounter for mental he alth services for perpetrator of nonspousal adult abuse
Z70.9 Sex counseling
Z71.9 Other counseling or consultation
Z72.0 Tobacco us e disorder, mild
Z72.810 Child or adolesce nt antisocial behavior
Z72.811 Adult antisocial behavior
Z72.9 Problem related to lifestyle
Z75.3 Unavailability or inaccessibility of health care facilities
Z75.4 Unavailability or inaccessib ility of other helping agencies
Z76.5 Malingering
Z91.19 Nonadherence to medical treatment
Z91.410 Personal history (past history) of  spouse or partne r violence, Physical
Z91.410 Personal history (past history) of spouse or partner violence, Sexual
Z91.411 Personal history (past history) of  spouse or partner psychological abuse
Z91.412 Personal history (past histor y) of spouse or partner neglect
Z91.49 Other personal history of psychological trauma
Z91.5 Personal history of self-harm
Z91.82 Personal history of military deployment
Z91.83 Wandering associated  with a mental disorder
Z91.89 Other personal risk factorsICD-10-CM Disorder, co ndition, or problem
897DSM-5 Advisors and
 Other Contributors
APA Board of Trustees DSM-5 Review Committees
Scientific Review Committee (SRC)
Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D. (Chair)
Robert Freedman, M.D. (Co-chair)
Dan G. Blazer, M.D., Ph.D., M.P.H. 
David Brent, M.D. (2011–)
Ellen Leibenluft, M.D.
Sir Michael Rutter, M.D. (–2011)
Paul S. Summergrad, M.D.
Robert J. Ursano, M.D. (–2011)
Myrna Weissman , Ph.D. (2011–)
Joel Yager, M.D.
Jill L. Opalesky M.S. (Administrative Support)
Clinical and Public Health Review 
Committee (CPHC)
John S. McIntyre, M.D. (Chair)
Joel Yager, M.D. (Co-chair)
Anita Everett M.D.
Cathryn A. Galanter, M.D.
Jeffrey M. Lyness, M.D.
James E. Nininger, M.D.
Victor I. Reus, M.D.
Michael J. Vergare, M.D.
Ann Miller (Administrative Support)
Oversight Committee 
Carolyn Robinowitz, M.D. (Chair)
Mary Badaracco, M.D.
Ronald Burd, M.D.
Robert Freedman, M.D.
Jeffrey A. Lieberman, M.D. 
Kyla Pope, M.D.
Victor I. Reus, M.D.
Daniel K. Winstead, M.D.
Joel Yager, M.D.
APA Assembly DSM-5 Review 
Committee
Glenn A. Martin, M.D. (Chair)
R. Scott Benson, M.D. (Speaker of the 
Assembly)
William Cardasis, M.D.
John M. de Figueiredo, M.D.
Lawrence S. Gross, M.D.
Brian S. Hart, M.D.Stephen A. McLeod Bryant, M.D.
Gregory A. Miller, M.D.
Roger Peele, M.D.
Charles S. Price, M.D.
Deepika Sastry, M.D.
John P.D. Shemo, M.D.
Eliot Sorel, M.D.
DSM-5 Summit Group
Dilip V. Jeste, M.D. (Chair)
R. Scott Benson, M.D.
Kenneth S. Kendler, M.D.
Helena C. Kraemer, Ph.D.
David J. Kupfer, M.D.
Jeffrey A. Lieberman, M.D.
Glenn A. Martin, M.D.
John S. McIntyre, M.D.
John M. Oldham, M.D.
Roger Peele, M.D.
Darrel A. Regier, M.D., M.P.H.
James H. Scully Jr., M.D.
Joel Yager, M.D. 
Paul S. Appelbaum, M.D. (Consultant)
Michael B. First, M.D. (Consultant) 
DSM-5 Field Trials Review
Robert D. Gibbons, Ph.D.
Craig Nelson, M.D.
DSM-5 Forensic Review
Paul S. Appelbaum, M.D.
Lama Bazzi, M.D.
Alec W. Buchanan, M.D., Ph.D.
Carissa Cabán Alemán, M.D.
Michael Champion, M.D.
Jeffrey C. Eisen, M.D.
Elizabeth Ford, M.D.
Daniel T. Hackman, M.D.
Mark Hauser, M.D.
Steven K. Hoge, M.D., M.B.A.
Debra A. Pinals, M.D.
Guillermo Portillo, M.D.
Patricia Recupero, M.D., J.D.
Robert Weinstock, M.D.
Cheryl Wills, M.D.
Howard V. Zonana, M.D.
898 DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors
Past DSM-5 APA Staff
Erin J. Dalder-Alpher
Kristin Edwards
Leah I. EngelLenna Jawdat
Elizabeth C. Martin
Rocio J. Salvador
Work Group Advisors
ADHD and Disruptive Behavior 
Disorders 
Emil F. Coccaro, M.D.
Deborah Dabrick, Ph.D.
Prudence W. Fisher, Ph.D.
Benjamin B. Lahey, Ph.D.
Salvatore Mannuzza, Ph.D.
Mary Solanto, Ph.D.
J. Blake Turner, Ph.D.
Eric Youngstrom, Ph.D.
Anxiety, Obsessive-Compulsive 
Spectrum, Posttraumatic, and 
Dissociative Disorders
Lynn E. Alden, Ph.D.
David B. Arciniegas, M.D.
David H. Barlow, Ph.D.
Katja Beesdo-Baum, Ph.D.
Chris R. Brewin, Ph.D.
Richard J. Brown, Ph.D.
Timothy A. Brown, Ph.D.
Richard A. Bryant, Ph.D.
Joan M. Cook, Ph.D.
Joop de Jong, M.D., Ph.D.
Paul F. Dell, Ph.D.
Damiaan Denys, M.D.
Bruce P. Dohrenwend, Ph.D.
Brian A. Fallon, M.D., M.P.H. 
Edna B. Foa, Ph.D.
Martin E. Franklin, Ph.D.
Wayne K. Goodman, M.D.
Jon E. Grant, J.D., M.D.
Bonnie L. Green, Ph.D.
Richard G. Heimberg, Ph.D.
Judith L. Herman, M.D.
Devon E. Hinton, M.D., Ph.D.
Stefan G. Hofmann, Ph.D.
Charles W. Hoge, M.D.
Terence M. Keane, Ph.D.
Nancy J. Keuthen, Ph.D.
Dean G. Kilpatrick, Ph.D.
Katharina Kircanski, Ph.D.
Laurence J. Kirmayer, M.D.
Donald F. Klein, M.D., D.Sc.
Amaro J. Laria, Ph.D.
Richard T. LeBeau, M.A.
Richard J. Loewenstein, M.D.
David Mataix-Cols, Ph.D.
Thomas W. McAllister, M.D.Harrison G. Pope, M.D., M.P.H.
Ronald M. Rapee, Ph.D. 
Steven A. Rasmussen, M.D. 
Patricia A. Resick, Ph.D.
Vedat Sar, M.D.
Sanjaya Saxena, M.D.
Paula P. Schnurr, Ph.D.
M. Katherine Shear, M.D.
Daphne Simeon, M.D.
Harvey S. Singer, M.D.
Melinda A. Stanley, Ph.D.
James J. Strain, M.D.
Kate Wolitzky Taylor, Ph.D.
Onno van der Hart, Ph.D.
Eric Vermetten, M.D., Ph.D.
John T. Walkup, M.D.
Sabine Wilhelm, Ph.D.
Douglas W. Woods, Ph.D.
Richard E. Zinbarg, Ph.D.
Joseph Zohar, M.D.
Childhood and Adolescent 
Disorders
Adrian Angold, Ph.D.
Deborah Beidel, Ph.D.
David Brent, M.D.
John Campo, M.D.
Gabrielle Carlson, M.D.
Prudence W. Fisher, Ph.D.
David Klonsky, Ph.D.
Matthew Nock, Ph.D.
J. Blake Turner, Ph.D.
Eating Disorders
Michael J. Devlin, M.D.
Denise E. Wilfley, Ph.D.
Susan Z. Yanovski, M.D.
Mood Disorders
Boris Birmaher, M.D.
Yeates Conwell, M.D.
Ellen B. Dennehy, Ph.D.
S. Ann Hartlage, Ph.D.
Jack M. Hettema, M.D., Ph.D.
Michael C. Neale, Ph.D.
Gordon B. Parker, M.D., Ph.D., D.Sc.
Roy H. Perlis, M.D. M.Sc.
Holly G. Prigerson, Ph.D.
Norman E. Rosenthal, M.D.
Peter J. Schmidt, M.D.
DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors 899
Mort M. Silverman, M.D.
Meir Steiner, M.D., Ph.D.
Mauricio Tohen, M.D., Dr.P.H., M.B.A.
Sidney Zisook, M.D.
Neurocognitive Disorders
Jiska Cohen-Mansfield, Ph.D.
Vladimir Hachinski, M.D., C.M., D.Sc. 
Sharon Inouye, M.D., M.P.H.
Grant Iverson, Ph.D.
Laura Marsh, M.D.
Bruce Miller, M.D.
Jacobo Mintzer, M.D., M.B.A.
Bruce Pollock, M.D., Ph.D.
George Prigatano, Ph.D.
Ron Ruff, Ph.D.
Ingmar Skoog, M.D., Ph.D.
Robert Sweet, M.D.
Paula Trzepacz, M.D.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Ari Ne’eman
Nickola Nelson, Ph.D.
Diane Paul, Ph.D.
Eva Petrova, Ph.D.
Andrew Pickles, Ph.D.
Jan Piek, Ph.D.
Helene Polatajko, Ph.D.
Alya Reeve, M.D.
Mabel Rice, Ph.D.
Joseph Sergeant, Ph.D.
Bennett Shaywitz, M.D.
Sally Shaywitz, M.D.
Audrey Thurm, Ph.D.
Keith Widaman, Ph.D. 
Warren Zigman, Ph.D.
Personality and Personality 
Disorders
Eran Chemerinski, M.D.
Thomas N. Crawford, Ph.D.
Harold W. Koenigsberg, M.D.
Kristian E. Markon, Ph.D.
Rebecca L. Shiner, Ph.D.
Kenneth R. Silk, M.D.
Jennifer L. Tackett, Ph.D.
David Watson, Ph.D.
Psychotic Disorders
Kamaldeep Bhui, M.D.
Manuel J. Cuesta, M.D., Ph.D.
Richard Douyon, M.D.
Paolo Fusar-Poli, Ph.D.
John H. Krystal, M.D.
Thomas H. McGlashan, M.D.
Victor Peralta, M.D., Ph.D.
Anita Riecher-Rössler, M.D.
Mary V. Seeman, M.D.Sexual and Gender Identity 
Disorders
Stan E. Althof, Ph.D.
Richard Balon, M.D.
John H.J. Bancroft, M.D., M.A., D.P.M.
Howard E. Barbaree, Ph.D., M.A.
Rosemary J. Basson, M.D.
Sophie Bergeron, Ph.D.
Anita L. Clayton, M.D.
David L. Delmonico, Ph.D.
Domenico Di Ceglie, M.D.
Esther Gomez-Gil, M.D.
Jamison Green, Ph.D.
Richard Green, M.D, J.D.
R. Karl Hanson, Ph.D.
Lawrence Hartmann, M.D.
Stephen J. Hucker, M.B.
Eric S. Janus, J.D.
Patrick M. Jern, Ph.D.
Megan S. Kaplan, Ph.D.
Raymond A. Knight, Ph.D.
Ellen T.M. Laan, Ph.D.
Stephen B. Levine, M.D.
Christopher G. McMahon, M.B.
Marta Meana, Ph.D.
Michael H. Miner, Ph.D., M.A.
William T. O’Donohue, Ph.D.
Michael A. Perelman, Ph.D.
Caroline F. Pukall, Ph.D.
Robert E. Pyke, M.D., Ph.D.
Vernon L. Quinsey, Ph.D. M.Sc.
David L. Rowland, Ph.D., M.A.
Michael Sand, Ph.D., M.P.H.
Leslie R. Schover, Ph.D., M.A.
Paul Stern, B.S, J.D.
David Thornton, Ph.D.
Leonore Tiefer, Ph.D.
Douglas E. Tucker, M.D.
Jacques van Lankveld, Ph.D.
Marcel D. Waldinger, M.D., Ph.D.
Sleep-Wake Disorders
Donald L. Bliwise, Ph.D.
Daniel J. Buysse, M.D.
Vishesh K. Kapur, M.D., M.P.H.
Sanjeeve V. Kothare, M.D.
Kenneth L. Lichstein, Ph.D.
Mark W. Mahowald, M.D.
Rachel Manber, Ph.D.
Emmanuel Mignot , M.D., Ph.D.
Timothy H. Monk, Ph.D., D.Sc.
Thomas C. Neylan, M.D.
Maurice M. Ohayon, M.D., D.Sc., Ph.D.
Judith Owens, M.D., M.P.H.
Daniel L. Picchietti, M.D.
Stuart F. Quan, M.D.
Thomas Roth, Ph.D.
Daniel Weintraub, M.D.
900 DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors
Theresa B. Young, Ph.D.
Phyllis C. Zee, M.D., Ph.D.
Somatic Symptom Disorders
Brenda Bursch, Ph.D.
Kurt Kroenke, M.D.
W. Curt LaFrance, Jr., M.D., M.P.H.
Jon Stone, M.B., Ch.B., Ph.D.
Lynn M. Wegner, M.D.Substance-Related Disorders
Raymond F. Anton, Jr., M.D.
Deborah A. Dawson, Ph.D.
Roland R. Griffiths, Ph.D.
Dorothy K. Hatsukami, Ph.D.
John E. Helzer, M.D.
Marilyn A. Huestis, Ph.D.
John R. Hughes, M.D.
Laura M. Juliano, Ph.D.
Thomas R. Kosten, M.D.
Nora D. Volkow, M.D.
DSM-5 Study Group and Ot her DSM-5 Group Advisors
Lifespan Developmental 
Approaches
Christina Bryant, Ph.D.
Amber Gum, Ph.D.
Thomas Meeks, M.D.
Jan Mohlman, Ph.D.
Steven Thorp, Ph.D.
Julie Wetherell, Ph.D.
Gender and Cross-Cultural Issues
Neil K. Aggarwal, M.D., M.B.A., M.A.
Sofie Bäärnhielm, M.D., Ph.D.
José J. Bauermeister, Ph.D.
James Boehnlein, M.D., M.Sc.
Jaswant Guzder, M.D.
Alejandro Interian, Ph.D.
Sushrut S. Jadhav, M.B.B.S., M.D., Ph.D. 
Laurence J. Kirmayer, M.D.
Alex J. Kopelowicz, M.D.
Amaro J. Laria, Ph.D.
Steven R. Lopez, Ph.D.
Kwame J. McKenzie, M.D.
John R. Peteet, M.D.Hans (J.G.B.M.) Rohlof, M.D.
Cecile Rousseau, M.D.
Mitchell G. Weiss, M.D., Ph.D.
Psychiatric/General Medical 
Interface
Daniel L. Coury, M.D.
Bernard P. Dreyer, M.D.
Danielle Laraque, M.D.
Lynn M. Wegner, M.D.
Impairment and Disability
Prudence W. Fisher, Ph.D.
Martin Prince, M.D., M.Sc.
Michael R. Von Korff, Sc.D.
Diagnostic Assessment 
Instruments
Prudence W. Fisher, Ph.D.
Robert D. Gibbons, Ph.D.
Ruben Gur, Ph.D.
John E. Helzer, M.D.
John Houston, M.D., Ph.D.
Kurt Kroenke, M.D.
Other Contributo rs/Consultants
ADHD and Disruptive Behavior 
Disorders 
Patrick E. Shrout, Ph.D.
Erik Willcutt, Ph.D. 
Anxiety, Obsessive-Compulsive 
Spectrum, Posttraumatic, and 
Dissociative Disorders 
Etzel Cardeña, Ph.D.
Richard J. Castillo, Ph.D.
Eric Hollander, M.D. 
Charlie Marmar, M.D. 
Alfonso Martínez-Taboas, Ph.D.
Mark W. Miller, Ph.D.
Mark H. Pollack, M.D.
Heidi S. Resnick, Ph.D.Childhood and Adolescent 
Disorders
Grace T. Baranek, Ph.D.
Colleen Jacobson, Ph.D.
Maria Oquendo, M.D.
Sir Michael Rutter, M.D.
Eating Disorders 
Nancy L. Zucker, Ph.D.
Mood Disorders 
Keith Hawton, M.D., Ph.D.
David A. Jobes, Ph.D.
Maria A. Oquendo, M.D.
Alan C. Swann, M.D.
DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors 901
Neurocognitive Disorders 
J. Eric Ahlskog, M.D., Ph.D.
Allen J. Aksamit, M.D.
Marilyn Albert, Ph.D.
Guy Mckhann, M.D.
Bradley Boeve, M.D. 
Helena Chui, M.D.
Sureyya Dikmen, Ph.D.
Douglas Galasko, M.D.
Harvey Levin, Ph.D. 
Mark Lovell, Ph.D. 
Jeffery Max, M.B.B.Ch. 
Ian McKeith, M.D.
Cynthia Munro, Ph.D.
Marlene Oscar-Berman, Ph.D. 
Alexander Troster, Ph.D.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders 
Anna Barnett, Ph.D.
Martha Denckla, M.D.
Jack M. Fletcher, Ph.D.
Dido Green, Ph.D.
Stephen Greenspan, Ph.D.
Bruce Pennington, Ph.D. 
Ruth Shalev, M.D.
Larry B. Silver, M.D.
Lauren Swineford, Ph.D.
Michael Von Aster, M.D.
Personality and Personality 
Disorders 
Patricia R. Cohen, Ph.D. 
Jaime L. Derringer, Ph.D. 
Lauren Helm, M.D. 
Christopher J. Patrick, Ph.D. 
Anthony Pinto, Ph.D. 
Psychotic Disorders 
Scott W. Woods, M.D.
Sexual and Gender Identity 
Disorders 
Alan J. Riley, M.Sc. 
Ray C. Rosen, Ph.D.
Sleep-Wake Disorders 
Jack D. Edinger, Ph.D. 
David Gozal, M.D. 
Hochang B. Lee, M.D. 
Tore A. Nielsen, Ph.D. 
Michael J. Sateia, M.D. 
Jamie M. Zeitzer, Ph.D. 
Somatic Symptom Disorders 
Chuck V. Ford, M.D. 
Patricia I. Rosebush, M.Sc.N., M.D. Substance-Related Disorders 
Sally M. Anderson, Ph.D.
Julie A. Kable, Ph.D.
Christopher Martin, Ph.D.
Sarah N. Mattson, Ph.D.
Edward V. Nunes, Jr., M.D. 
Mary J. O’Connor, Ph.D.
Heather Carmichael Olson, Ph.D.
Blair Paley, Ph.D.
Edward P. Riley, Ph.D.
Tulshi D. Saha, Ph.D. 
Wim van den Brink, M.D., Ph.D.
George E. Woody, M.D. 
Diagnostic Spectra and DSM/ICD 
Harmonization 
Bruce Cuthbert, Ph.D. 
Lifespan Developmental 
Approaches 
Aartjan Beekman Ph.D.
Alistair Flint, M.B.
David Sultzer, M.D. 
Ellen Whyte, M.D. 
Gender and Cross-Cultural Issues 
Sergio Aguilar-Gaxiola, M.D., Ph.D. 
Kavoos G. Bassiri, M.S.
Venkataramana Bhat, M.D.
Marit Boiler, M.P.H. 
Denise Canso, M.Sc.
Smita N. Deshpande, M.D., D.P.M. 
Ravi DeSilva, M.D. 
Esperanza Diaz, M.D.
Byron J. Good, Ph.D. 
Simon Groen, M.A.
Ladson Hinton, M.D. 
Lincoln I. Khasakhala, Ph.D.
Francis G. Lu, M.D. 
Athena Madan, M.A.
Anne W. Mbwayo, Ph.D.
Oanh Meyer, Ph.D.
Victoria N. Mutiso, Ph.D., D.Sc. 
David M. Ndetei, M.D.
Andel V. Nicasio, M.S.Ed.
Vasudeo Paralikar, M.D., Ph.D.
Kanak Patil, M.A.
Filipa I. Santos, H.B.Sc.
Sanjeev B. Sarmukaddam, Ph.D., M.Sc.
Monica Z. Scal co, M.D., Ph.D.
Katie Thompson, M.A. 
Hendry Ton, M.D., M.Sc. 
Rob C.J. van Dijk, M.Sc. 
William A. Vega, Ph.D. 
Johann M. Vega-Dienstmaier, M.D.
Joseph Westermeyer, M.D., Ph.D.
902 DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors
Psychiatric/General Medical 
Interface
Daniel J. Balog, M.D.
Charles C. Engel, M.D., M.P.H.
Charles D. Motsinger, M.D.
Impairment and Disability 
Cille Kennedy, Ph.D. 
Diagnostic Assessment 
Instruments
Paul J. Pikonis, Ph.D. Other Conditions That May Be 
a Focus of Clinical Attention
William E. Narrow, M.D., M.P.H., Chair
Roger Peele, M.D.
Lawson R. Wulsin, M.D.
Charles H. Zeanah, M.D.
Prudence W. Fisher, Ph.D., Advisor
Stanley N. Caroff, M.D., Contributor/Consultant
James B. Lohr, M.D., Contributor/Consultant
Marianne Wambolt, Ph.D., Contributor/Consultant
DSM-5 Research Group
Allan Donner, Ph.D.
CPHC Peer Reviewers
Kenneth Altshuler, M.D.
Pedro G. Alvarenga, M.D.
Diana J. Antonacci, M.D.
Richard Balon, M.D.
David H. Barlow, Ph.D.
L. Jarrett Ba rnhill, M.D.
Katja Beesdo-Baum, Ph.D.
Marty Boman, Ed.D.
James Bourgeois, M.D.
David Braff, M.D.
Harry Brandt, M.D.
Kirk Brower, M.D.
Rachel Bryant-Waugh, Ph.D.
Jack D. Burke Jr., M.D., M.P.H.
Brenda Bursch, Ph.D.
Joseph Camilleri, M.D.
Patricia Casey, M.D.
F. Xavier Castellanos, M.D.
Eran Chemerinski, M.D.
Wai Chen, M.D.
Elie Cheniaux, M.D., D.Sc.
Cheryl Chessick, M.D,
J. Richard Ciccone, M.D.
Anita H. Clayton, M.D.
Tihalia J. Coleman, Ph.D.
John Csernansky, M.D.
Manuel J. Cuesta M.D., Ph.D.
Joanne L. Davis, M.D.
David L. Delmonico, Ph.D.
Ray J. DePaulo, M.D.
Dimitris Dikeos, M.D.
Ina E. Djonlagic, M.D.
C. Neill Epperson, M.D.
Javier I. Escobar, M.D., M.Sc.
Spencer Eth, M.D.
David Fassler, M.D.
Giovanni A. Fava, M.D.
Robert Feinstein, M.D.
Molly Finnerty, M.D.
Mark H. Fleisher, M.D.
Alessio Florentini, M.D.Laura Fochtmann, M.D.
Marshal Forstein, M.D.
William French, M.D.
Maximillian Gahr, M.D.
Cynthia Geppert, M.D.
Ann Germaine, Ph.D.
Marcia Goin, M.D.
David A. Gorelick, M.D., Ph.D.
David Graeber, M.D.
Cynthia A. Graham, Ph.D.
Andreas Hartmann, M.D.
Victoria Hendrick, M.D.
Merrill Herman, M.D.
David Herzog, M.D.
Mardi Horowitz, M.D.
Ya-fen Huang, M.D.
Anthony Kales, M.D
Niranjan S. Karnik, M.D., Ph.D.
Jeffrey Katzman, M.D.
Bryan King, M.D.
Cecilia Kjellgren, M.D.
Harold W. Koenigsberg, M.D.
Richard B. Krueger, M.D.
Steven Lamberti, M.D.
Ruth A. Lanius, M.D.
John Lauriello, M.D.
Anthony Lehman, M.D.
Michael Linden, M.D.
Mark W. Mahowald, M.D.
Marsha D. Marcus, Ph.D.
Stephen Marder, M.D.
Wendy Marsh, M.D.
Michael S. McCloskey, Ph.D.
Jeffrey Metzner, M.D.
Robert Michels, M.D.
Laura Miller, M.D.
Michael C. Miller, M.D.
Frederick Moeller, M.D.
Peter T. Morgan, M.D., Ph.D.
Madhav Muppa, M.D.
Philip Muskin, M.D.
DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors 903
Joachim Nitschke, M.D.
Abraham Nussbaum, M.D.
Ann Olincy, M.D.
Mark Onslow, Ph.D.
Sally Ozonoff, Ph.D.
John R. Peteet, M.D.
Ismene L. Petrakis, M.D.
Christophe M. Pfeiffer, M.D.
Karen Pierce, M.D.
Belinda Plattner, M.D.
Franklin Putnam, M.D.
Stuart F. Quan, M.D.
John Racy, M.D.
Phillip Resnick, M.D.
Michele Riba, M.D.
Jerold Rosenbaum, M.D.
Stephen Ross, M.D.
Lawrence Scahill, M.S.N., Ph.D. 
Daniel Schechter, M.D.
Mary V. Seeman, M.D.
Alessandro Serretti, M.D.
Jianhua Shen, M.D.Ravi Kumar R. Singareddy, M.D.
Ingmar Skoog, M.D., Ph.D.
Gary Small, M.D.
Paul Soloff, M.D.
Christina Stadle r, M.D., Ph.D.
Nada Stotland, M.D.
Neil Swerdlow, M.D.
Kim Tillery, Ph.D.
David Tolin, Ph.D.
Jayne Trachman, M.D.
Luke Tsai, M.D.
Ming T. Tsuang, M.D., Ph.D.
Richard Tuch, M.D.
Johan Verhulst, M.D.
B. Timothy Walsh, M.D.
Michael Weissberg, M.D.
Godehard Weniger, M.D.
Keith Widaman, Ph.D.
Thomas Wise, M.D.
George E. Woods, M.D.
Kimberly A. Yonkers, M.D.
Alexander Young, M.D.
DSM-5 Field Trials in Academic Clinical Centers—
Adult Samples
David Geffen School of Medicine, Univ ersity of California, Los Angeles
Investigator
Helen Lavretsky, M.D., Principal Investigator
Referring and Interviewing 
Clinicians
Jessica Brommelhoff, Ph.D.
Xavier Cagigas, Ph.D.
Paul Cernin, Ph.D.
Linda Ercoli, Ph.D.
Randall Espinoza, M.D.Helen Lavretsky, M.D.
Jeanne Kim, Ph.D.
David Merrill, M.D.
Karen Miller, Ph.D.
Christopher Nunez, Ph.D.
Research Coordinators
Natalie St. Cyr, M.A., Lead Research 
Coordinator
Nora Nazarian, B.A.
Colin Shinn, M.A.
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Investigators
Bruce G. Pollock, M.D., Ph.D., Lead Principal 
Investigator
R. Michael Bagby, Ph.D., Principal Investigator
Kwame J. McKenzie, M.D., Principal 
Investigator
Tony P. George, M.D., Co-investigator
Lena C. Quilty, Ph.D., Co-investigator
Peter Voore, M.D., Co-investigator
Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Donna E. Akman, Ph.D.
R. Michael Bagby, Ph.D.
Wayne C. V. Baici, M.D.
Crystal Baluyut, M.D.Eva W. C. Chow, M.D., J.D., M.P.H.
Z. J. Daskalakis, M.D., Ph.D.
Pablo Diaz-Hermosillo, M.D.
George Foussias, M.Sc., M.D.
Paul A. Frewen, Ph.D.
Ariel Graff-Guerrero, M.D., M.Sc., Ph.D.
Margaret K. Hahn, M.D.
Lorena Hsu, Ph.D.
Justine Joseph, Ph.D.
Sean Kidd, Ph.D.
Kwame J. McKenzie, M.D.
Mahesh Menon, Ph.D.
Romina Mizrahi, M.D., Ph.D.
Daniel J. Mueller, M.D., Ph.D.
Lena C. Quilty, Ph.D.
Anthony C. Ruocco, Ph.D.
904 DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors
Jorge Soni, M.D.
Aristotle N. Voineskos, M.D., Ph.D.
George Voineskos, M.D.
Peter Voore, Ph.D.
Chris Watson, Ph.D.
Referring Clinicians 
Ofer Agid, M.D.
Ash Bender, M.D.
Patricia Cavanagh, M.D.
Sarah Colman, M.D.
Vincenzo Deluca, M.D.
Justin Geagea, M.D.
David S. Goldbloom, M.D.
Daniel Greben, M.D.
Malati Gupta, M.D.
Ken Harrison, M.D.
Imraan Jeeva, M.D.
Joel Jeffries, M.B. 
Judith Laposa, Ph.D.Jan Malat, M.D.
Shelley McMain, Ph.D.
Bruce Pollock, M.D., Ph.D.
Andriy V. Samokhva lov, M.D., Ph.D.
Martin Strassnig, M.D.
Albert H. C. Wong, M.D., Ph.D.
Research Coordinators
Gloria I. Leo, M.A., Lead Research Coordinator
Anissa D. Bachan, B.A.
Bahar Haji-Khamneh, M.A.
Olga Likhodi, M.Sc.
Eleanor J. Liu, Ph.D.
Sarah A. McGee Ng, B.B.A.
Other Research Staff
Susan E. Dickens, M.A., Clinical Research 
Manager
Sandy Richards, B.Sc.N., Schizophrenia 
Research Manager
Dallas VA Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
Investigators
Carol S. North, M.D., M.P.E., Principal 
Investigator
Alina Suris, Ph.D., A.B.P.P., Principal 
Investigator
Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Barry Ardolf, Psy.D.
Abila Awan, M.D.
Joel Baskin, M.D.
John Black, Ph.D.
Jeffrey Dodds, Ph.D.
Gloria Emmett, Ph.D.
Karma Hudson, M.D.
Jamylah Jackson, Ph.D., A.B.P.P.
Lynda Kirkland-Culp, Ph.D., A.B.P.P.
Heidi Koehler, Ph.D., A.B.P.P.
Elizabeth Lewis, Psy.D.
Aashish Parikh, M.D.
Reed Robinson, Ph.D.
Jheel Shah, M.D.
Geetha Shivakumar, M.D.
Sarah Spain, Ph.D., A.B.P.P.Lisa Thoman, Ph.D.
Lia Thomas, M.D.
Jamie Zabukovec, Psy.D.
Mustafa Zaidi, M.D.
Andrea Zartman, Ph.D.
General Referral Sources
Robert Blake, L.M.S.W.
Evelyn Gibbs, L.M.S.W.
Michelle King-Thompson, L.M.S.W.
Research Coordinators
Jeannie B. Whitman, Ph.D., Lead Research 
Coordinator
Sunday Adewuyi, M.D.
Elizabeth Anderson, B.A.
Solaleh Azimipour, B.S.
Carissa Barney, B.S.
Kristie Cavazos, B.A.
Robert Devereaux, B.S.
Dana Downs, M.S., M.S.W.
Sharjeel Farooqui, M.D.
Julia Smith, Psy.D.
Kun-Ying H. Sung, B.S.
School of Medicine, The University of Texas San Antonio, 
San Antonio, Texas
Investigator
Mauricio Tohen, M.D., Dr.P.H., M.B.A., 
Principal Investigator 
Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Suman Baddam, Psy.D.
Charles L. Bowden, M.D.Nancy Diazgranados, M.D., M.S.
Craig A. Dike, Psy.D.
Dianne E. Dunn, Psy.D., M.P.H.
Elena Gherman, M.D.
Jodi M. Gonzalez, Ph.D.
Pablo Gonzalez, M.D.
Phillip Lai, Psy.D.
DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors 905
Natalie Maples-Aguilar, M.A., L.P.A.
Marlon P. Quinones, M.D.
Jeslina J. Raj, Psy.D.
David L. Roberts, Ph.D.
Nancy Sandusky, R.N., F.P.M.H.N.P.-B.C., 
D.N.P.-C.
Donna S. Stutes, M.S., L.P.C.
Mauricio Tohen, M.D., Dr.PH, M.B.A.
Dawn I. Velligan, Ph.D.
Weiran Wu, M.D., Ph.D.
Referring Clinicians
Albana Dassori, M.D.
Megan Frederick, M.A.Robert Gonzalez, M.D.
Uma Kasinath, M.D.
Camis Milam, M.D.
Vivek Singh, M.D.
Peter Thompson, M.D.
Research Coordinators
Melissa Hernandez, B.A., Lead Research 
Coordinator
Fermin Alejandro Carrizales, B.A.
Martha Dahl, R.N., B.S.N.
Patrick M. Smith, B.A. 
Nicole B. Watson, M.A. 
Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center and the Menninger Clinic, 
Houston, Texas (Joint Study Site)
Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center
Investigator
Laura Marsh, M.D., Principal Investigator
Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Shalini Aggarwal, M.D.
Su Bailey, Ph.D.
Minnete (Helen) Beckner, Ph.D.
Crystal Clark, M.D.
Charles DeJohn, M.D.
Robert Garza, M.D.
Aruna Gottumakkla, M.D.
Janet Hickey, M.D.
James Ireland, M.D.
Mary Lois Lacey, A.P.R.N.
Wendy Leopoulos, M.D.
Laura Marsh, M.D.
Deleene Menefee, Ph.D.
Brian I. Miller, Ph.D. 
Candy Smith, Ph.D.
Avila Steele, Ph.D.
Jill Wanner, Ph.D.
Rachel Wells, Ph.D.
Kaki York-Ward, Ph.D.Referring Clinicians
Sara Allison, M.D.
Leonard Denney, L.C.S.W.
Catherine Flores, L.C.S.W.
Nathalie Marie, M.D.
Christopher Martin, M.D.
Sanjay Mathew, M.D.
Erica Montgomery, M.D.
Gregory Scholl, P.A.
Jocelyn Ulanday, M.D., M.P.H. 
Research Coordinators
Sarah Neely Torres, B.S., Lead Research 
Coordinator
Kathleen Grout, M.A.
Lea Kiefer, M.P.H.
Jana Tran, M.A.
Volunteer Research Assistants
Catherine Clark
Linh Hoang
Menninger Clinic 
Investigator
Efrain Bleiberg, M.D., Principal Investigator
Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Jennifer Baumgardner, Ph.D.  
Elizabeth Dodd Conaway, L.C.S.W., B.C.D. 
Warren Christianson, D.O.  
Wesley Clayton, L.M.S.W. 
J. Christopher Fowler, Ph.D. 
Michael Groat, Ph.D. 
Edythe Harvey, M.D. 
Denise Kagan, Ph.D. 
Hans Meyer, L.C.S.W. Segundo Robert-Ibarra, M.D. 
Sandhya Trivedi, M.D. 
Rebecca Wagner, Ph.D. 
Harrell Woodson, Ph.D.
Amanda Yoder, L.C.S.W. 
Referring Clinicians
James Flack, M.D.
David Ness, M.D.
Research Coordinators
Steve Herrera, B.S., M.T., Lead Research 
Coordinator
Allison Kalpakci, B.A.
906 DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
Investigators
Mark A. Frye, M.D., Principal Investigator
Glenn E. Smith, Ph.D., Principal Investigator
Jeffrey P. Staab M.D., M.S., Principal 
Investigator
Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Osama Abulseoud, M.D. 
Jane Cerhan, Ph.D.
Julie Fields, Ph.D. 
Mark A. Frye, M.D.
Manuel Fuentes, M.D.
Yonas Geda, M.D. 
Maria Harmandayan, M.D.
Reba King, M.D. 
Simon Kung, M.D.
Mary Machuda, Ph.D. 
Donald McAlpine, M.D. 
Alastair McKean, M.D.
Juliana Moraes, M.D.
Teresa Rummans, M.D.James R. Rundell, M.D. 
Richard Seime, Ph.D. 
Glenn E. Smith, Ph.D. 
Christopher Sola, D.O.
Jeffrey P. Staab M.D., M.S. 
Marin Veldic, M.D. 
Mark D. Williams, M.D. 
Maya Yustis, Ph.D. 
Research Coordinators
Lisa Seymour, B.S., Lead Research Coordinator
Scott Feeder, M.S.
Lee Gunderson, B.S.
Sherrie Hanna, M.A., L.P.
Kelly Harper, B.A.
Katie Mingo, B.A.
Cynthia Stoppel, A.S.
Other Study Staff
Anna Frye
Andrea Hogan
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Investigators
Mahendra T. Bhati, M.D., Principal Investigator
Marna S. Barrett, Ph.D., Co-investigator
Michael E. Thase, M. D., Co-investigator
Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Peter B. Bloom, M.D.
Nicole K Chalmers L.C.S.W.
Torrey A. Creed, Ph.D.
Mario Cristancho, M.D.
Amy Cunningham, Psy.D.
John P. Dennis, Ph.D.
Josephine Elia, M.D.
Peter Gariti, Ph.D., L.C.S.W.
Philip Gehrman, Ph.D.
Laurie Gray, M.D.
Emily A.P. Haigh, Ph.D.
Nora J. Johnson, M.B.A., M.S., Psy.D.
Paulo Knapp, M.D.
Yong-Tong Li, M.D.
Bill Mace, Ph.D.
Kevin S. McCarthy, Ph.D.
Dimitri Perivoliotis, Ph.D.
Luke Schultz, Ph.D.
Tracy Steen, Ph.D.
Chris Tjoa, M.D.
Nancy A. Wintering, L.C.S.W.
Referring Clinicians
Eleanor Ainslie, M.D.
Kelly C. Allison, Ph.D.Rebecca Aspden, M.D.
Claudia F. Baldassano, M.D.
Vijayta Bansal, M.D.
Rachel A. Bennett, M.D.
Richard Bollinger, Ph.D.
Andrea Bowen, M.D.
Karla Campanella, M.D.
Anthony Carlino, M.D.
Noah Carroll, M.S.S.
Alysia Cirona, M.D.
Samuel Collier, M.D.
Andreea Crauciuc, L.C.S.W.
Pilar Cristancho, M.D.
Traci D'Almeida, M.D. 
Kathleen Diller, M.D.
Benoit Dubé, M.D.
Jon Dukes, M.S.W.
Lauren Elliott, M.D.
Mira Elwell, B.A.
Mia Everett, M.D.
Lucy F. Faulconbridge, Ph.D.
Patricia Furlan, Ph.D.
Joanna Goldstein, L.C.S.W.
Paul Grant, Ph.D.
Jillian Graves, L.C.S.W.
Tamar Gur, M.D., Ph.D.
Alisa Gutman, M.D., Ph.D.
Nora Hymowitz, M.D.
Sofia Jensen, M.D.
Tiffany King, M.S.W.
Katherine Levine, M.D.
DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors 907
Alice Li, M.D.
Janet Light, L.C.S.W.
John Listerud, M.D., Ph.D.
Emily Malcoun, Ph.D.
Donovan Maust, M.D.
Adam Meadows, M.D.
Michelle Moyer, M.D.
Rebecca Naugle, L.C.S.W.
Cory Newman, Ph.D.
John Northrop, M.D., Ph.D.
Elizabeth A. Ellis Ohr, Psy.D.
John O'Reardon, M.D.
Abraham Pachikara, M.D.
Andrea Perelman, M.S.W.
Diana Perez, M.S.W.
Bianca Previdi, M.D.
J. Russell Ramsay, Ph.D.
Jorge Rivera-Colon, M.D.
Jan Smedley, L.C.S.W.
Katie Struble, M.S.W.
Aita Susi, M.D.
Yekaterina Tatarchuk, M.D.
Ellen Tarves, M.A.
Allison Tweedie, M.D.
Holly Valerio, M.D.Thomas A. Wadden, Ph.D.
Joseph Wright, Ph.D.
Yan Xuan, M.D.
David Yusko, Psy.D.
Research Coordinators
Jordan A. Coello, B.A., Lead Research 
Coordinator
Eric Wang, B.S.E.
Volunteer Research Assistants/
Interns
Jeannine Barker, M.A., A.T.R.
Jacqueline Baron
Kelsey Bogue 
Alexandra Ciomek
Martekuor Dodoo, B.A.
Julian Domanico
Laura Heller, B.A.
Leah Hull-Rawson, B.A.
Jacquelyn Klehm, B.A.
Christina Lam
Dante Proetto, B.S.
Molly Roy
Casey Shannon
Stanford University School of  Medicine, Stanford, California
Investigators
Carl Feinstein, M.D., Principal Investigator
Debra Safer, M.D., Principal Investigator
Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Kari Berquist, Ph.D.
Eric Clausell, Ph.D.
Danielle Colborn, Ph.D. 
Whitney Daniels, M.D.
Alison Darcy, Ph.D.
Krista Fielding, M.D.
Mina Fisher, M.D.
Kara Fitzpatrick, Ph.D.
Wendy Froehlich, M.D.
Grace Gengoux, Ph.D.
Anna Cassandra Golding, Ph.D.
Lisa Groesz, Ph.D. 
Kyle Hinman, M.D.
Rob Holaway, Ph.D.
Matthew Holve, M.D.
Rex Huang, M.D.
Nina Kirz, M.D.
Megan Klabunde, Ph.D.
John Leckie, Ph.D.
Naomi Leslie, M.D.
Adrianne Lona, M.D.
Ranvinder Rai, M.D.
Rebecca Rialon, Ph.D.
Beverly Rodriguez, M.D., Ph.D.
Debra Safer, M.D.
Mary Sanders, Ph.D.Jamie Scaletta, Ph.D.
Norah Simpson, Ph.D.
Manpreet Singh, M.D.
Maria-Christina Stewart, Ph.D.
Melissa Vallas, M.D.
Patrick Whalen, Ph.D.
Sanno Zack, Ph.D.
Referring Clinicians
Robin Apple, Ph.D.
Victor Carrion, M.D.
Carl Feinstein, M.D.
Christine Gray, Ph.D. 
Antonio Hardan, M.D. 
Megan Jones, Psy.D. 
Linda Lotspeich, M.D.
Lauren Mikula, Psy.D. 
Brandyn Street, Ph.D. 
Violeta Tan, M.D.
Heather Taylor, Ph.D. 
Jacob Towery, M.D.
Sharon Williams, Ph.D. 
Research Coordinators
Kate Arnow, B.A., Lead Research Coordinator
Nandini Datta, B.S.
Stephanie Manasse, B.A.
Volunteer Research Assistants/
Interns
Arianna Martin, M.S.
Adriana Nevado, B.A.
908 DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors
Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado
Investigator
Marianne Wamboldt , M.D., Principal 
Investigator
Referring and Interviewing 
Clinicians
Galia Abadi, M.D.
Steven Behling, Ph.D.
Jamie Blume, Ph.D.
Adam Burstein, M.D.
Debbie Carter, M.D.
Kelly Caywood, Ph.D.
Meredith Chapman, M.D.
Paulette Christian, A.P.P.M.H.N.
Mary Cook, M.D.
Anthony Cordaro, M.D.
Audrey Dumas, M.D.
Guido Frank, M.D.
Karen Frankel, Ph.D.
Darryl Graham, Ph.D.
Yael Granader, Ph.D.
Isabelle Guillemet, M.D.
Patrece Hairston, Ph.D.
Charles Harrison, Ph.D.
Tammy Herckner, L.C.S.W.
Cassie Karlsson, M.D.
Kimberly Kelsay, M.D.
David Kieval, Ph.D.
Megan Klabunde, Ph.D.
Jaimelyn Kost, L.C.S.W.
Harrison Levine, M.D.
Raven Lipmanson, M.D.
Susan Lurie, M.D.
Asa Marokus, M.D.
Idalia Massa, Ph.D.
Christine McDunn, Ph.D.
Scot McKay, M.D.
Marissa Murgolo, L.C.S.W.
Alyssa Oland, Ph.D.
Lina Patel, Ph.D.
Rheena Pineda, Ph.D.
Gautam Rajendran, M.D.
Diane Reichmuth, Ph.D
Michael Rollin, M.D.Marlena Romero, L.C.S.W.
Michelle Roy, Ph.D.
Celeste St. John-Larkin, M.D.
Elise Sannar, Ph.D.
Daniel Savin, M.D.
Claire Dean Sinclair, Ph.D.
Ashley Smith, L.C.S.W.
Mindy Solomon, Ph.D.
Sally Tarbell, Ph.D.
Helen Thilly, L.C.S.W.
Sara Tlustos-Carter, Ph.D.
Holly Vause, A.P.P.M.H.N
Marianne Wamboldt, M.D.
Angela Ward, L.C.S.W.
Jason Williams, Ph.D.
Jason Willoughby, Ph.D.
Brennan Young, Ph.D.
Referring Clinicians
Kelly Bhatnagar, Ph.D.
Jeffery Dolgan, Ph.D.
Jennifer Eichberg, L.C.S.W.
Jennifer Hagman, M.D.
James Masterson, L.C.S.W.
Hy Gia Park, M.D.
Tami Roblek, Ph.D.
Wendy Smith, Ph.D.
David Williams, M.D.
Research Coordinators
Laurie Burnside, M.S.M., C.C.R.C., Lead 
Research Coordinator
Darci Anderson, B.A., C.C.R.C.
Heather Kennedy, M.P.H.
Amanda Millar, B.A.
Vanessa Waruinge, B.S.
Elizabeth Wallace, B.A.
Volunteer Research Assistants/
Interns
Wisdom Amouzou
Ashley Anderson
Michael Richards
Mateya Whyte
Baystate Medical Center, Springfield, Massachusetts
Investigators
Bruce Waslick, M.D., Principal Investigator
Cheryl Bonica, Ph.D., Co-investigator 
John Fanton, M.D., Co-investigator 
Barry Sarvet, M.D. , Co-investigator Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Julie Bermant, R.N., M.S.N., N.P.
Cheryl Bonica, Ph.D.
Jodi Devine, L.I.C.S.W.
William Fahey, Ph.D.
John Fanton, M.D.
DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors 909
Stephane Jacobus, Ph.D.
Barry Sarvet, M.D.
Peter Thunfors, Ph.D.
Bruce Waslick, M.D.
Vicki Weld, L.I.C.S.W.
Sara Wiener, L.I.C.S.W.
Shadi Zaghloul, M.D.
Referring Clinicians
Sarah Detenber, L.I.C.S.W.
Gordon Garrison, L.I.C.S.W.
Jacqueline Humpreys, L.I.C.S.W.
Noreen McGirr, L.I.C.S.W.Sarah Marcotte, L.C.S.W.
Patricia Rogowski, R.N., C.N.S.
Research Coordinators
Julie Kingsbury, C.C.R.P., Lead Research 
Coordinator
Brenda Martin, B.A.
Volunteer Research Assistant/
Intern
Liza Detenber
New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, N.Y., Weill Cornell 
Medical College, Payne Whitney and Westchester Divisions, New York 
and White Plains, N.Y., and North Shore Child and Family Guidance 
Center, Roslyn Heights, N.Y. (Joint Study Site)
Investigator
Prudence W. Fisher, Ph.D., Principal 
Investigator
Research Coordinators
Julia K. Carmody, B.A., Lead Research 
Coordinator
Zvi R. Shapiro, B.A., Lead Research 
CoordinatorVolunteers
Preeya Desai
Samantha Keller
Jeremy Litfin, M.A.
Sarah L. Pearlstein, B.A.
Cedilla Sacher
New York State Psychiatric Institute
Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Michele Cohen, L.C.S.W.
Eduvigis Cruz-Arrieta, Ph.D.
Miriam Ehrensaft, Ph.D.
Laurence Greenhill, M.D.
Schuyler Henderson, M.D., M.P.H.
Sharlene Jackson, Ph.D.
Lindsay Moskowitz, M.D.
Sweene C. Oscar, Ph.D.
Xenia Protopopescu, M.D.
James Rodriguez, Ph.D.
Gregory Tau, M.D.
Melissa Tebbs, L.C.S.W.
Carolina Velez-Grau, L.C.S.W.
Khadijah Booth Watkins, M.D.
Referring Clinicians
George Alvarado, M.D.
Alison Baker, M.D.
Elena Baron, Psy.D.
Lincoln Bickford, M.D., Ph.D.
Zachary Blumkin, Psy.D.
Colleen Cullen, L.C.S.W.
Chyristianne DeAlmeida, Ph.D.
Matthew Ehrlich, M.D.Eve Friedl, M.D.
Clare Gaskins, Ph.D.
Alice Greenfield, L.C.S.W.
Liora Hoffman, M.D.
Kathleen Jung, M.D.
Karimi Mailutha, M.D., M.P.H.
Valentina Nikulina, Ph.D.
Tal Reis, Ph.D. 
Moira Rynn, M.D.
Jasmine Sawhney, M.D.
Sarajbit Singh, M.D.
Katherine Stratigos, M.D.
Oliver Stroeh, M.D.
Russell Tobe, M.D.
Meghan Tomb, Ph.D.
Michelle Tricamo, M.D.
Research Coordinators
Angel A. Caraballo, M.D.
Erica M. Chin, Ph.D.
Daniel T. Chrzanowski, M.D.
Tess Dougherty, B.A.
Stephanie Hundt, M.A.
Moira A. Rynn, M.D.
Deborah Stedge, R.N.
910 DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors
Weill Cornell Medical College, Payne Whitney and Westchester Divisions
Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Archana Basu, Ph.D.
Shannon M. Bennett, M.D.
Maria De Pena-Nowak, M.D.
Jill Feldman, L.M.S.W.
Dennis Gee, M.D.
Jo R. Hariton, Ph.D.
Lakshmi P. Reddy, M.D.
Margaret Yoon, M.D.
Referring Clinicians
Margo Benjamin, M.D.
Vanessa Bobb, M.D.
Elizabeth Bochtler, M.D.
Katie Cave, L.C.S.W.
Maalobeeka Gangopadhyay, M.D.Jodi Gold, M.D.
Tejal Kaur, M.D.
Aaron Krasner, M.D.
Amy Miranda, L.C.S.W.
Cynthia Pfeffer, M.D.
James Rebeta, Ph.D.
Sharon Skariah, M.D.
Jeremy Stone, Ph.D.
Dirk Winter, M.D.
Research Coordinators
Alex Eve Keller, B.S., Lead Research Coordinator
Nomi Bodner (volunteer)
Barbara L. Flye, Ph.D.
Jamie S. Neiman (volunteer)
Rebecca L. Rendleman, M.D.
North Shore Child and Family Guidance Center
Referring and Interviewing Clinicians
Casye Brachfeld-Launer, L.C.S.W.
Susan Klein Cohen, Ph.D.
Amy Gelb, L.C.S.W.-R.
Jodi Glasser, L.C.S.W.
Elizabeth Goulding-Tag, L.C.S.W.
Deborah B. Kassimir, L.C.S.W.
Margo Posillico Messina, L.C.S.W.
Andréa Moullin-Heddle, L.M.S.W.
Lisa Pineda, L.C.S.W.
Elissa Smilowitz, L.C.S.W.
Referring Clinicians
Regina Barros-Rivera, L.C.S.W.-R. Assistant 
Executive Director
Maria Christiansen, B.S.
Amy Davies-Hollander, L.M.S.W.
Eartha Hackett, M.S.Ed., M.Sc., B.Sc.Bruce Kaufstein, L.C.S.W.-R, Director of 
Clinical Services
Kathy Knaust, L.C.S.W.
John Levinson, L.C.S.W.-R, B.C.D.
Andrew Maleckoff, L.C.S.W., Executive 
Director/CEO
Sarah Rosen, L.C.S.W.-R, A.C.S.W.
Abigail Rothenberg, L.M.S.W.
Christine Scotten, A.C.S.W.
Michelle Spatano, L.C.S.W.-R.
Diane Straneri, M.S., R.N., C.S.
Rosara Torrisi, L.M.S.W.
Rob Vichnis, L.C.S.W.
Research Coordinators
Toni Kolb-Papetti, L.C.S.W.
Sheena M. Dauro (volunteer)
DSM-5 Field Trials Pilot Study, 
Johns Hopkins Medical Institution, Baltimore, Maryland
Adult Sample
Community Psychiatry Outpatient Pr ogram, Department of Psychiatry 
and Behavioral Sciences Main Campus
Investigators
Bernadette Cullen, M.B., B.Ch., B.A.O., 
Principal Investigator
Holly C. Wilcox, Ph.D., Principal Investigator
Referring and Interviewing 
Clinicians
Bernadette Cullen, M.B., B.Ch., B.A.O. 
Shane Grant, L.C.S.W.-C.
Charee Green, L.C.P.C.Emily Lorensen, L.C.S.W.-C.
Kathleen Malloy, L.C.P.C.
Gary Pilarchik, L.C.S.W.-C
Holly Slater, L.C.P.C.
Stanislav Spivak, M.D.
Tarcia Spencer Turner, L.C.P.C.
Nicholas Seldes Windt, L.C.S.W.-C.
Research Coordinators
Mellisha McKitty, B.A.
Alison Newcomer, M.H.S.
DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors 911
Pediatric Sample
Child and Adolescent Outpatient Progr am, Department of  Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences Bayview Medical Center
Investigators
Joan P. Gerring, M.D., Principal Investigator
Leslie Miller, M.D., Principal Investigator
Holly C. Wilcox, Ph.D., Co-investigator
Referring and Interviewing 
Clinicians
Shannon Barnett, M.D.
Gwen Condon, L.C.P.C.
Brijan Fellows, L.C.S.W.-C.
Heather Garner, L.C.S.W.-C.
Joan P. Gerring, M.D.Anna Gonzaga, M.D.
Debra Jenkins, L.C.S.W.-C.
Paige N. Johnston, L.C.P.C.
Brenda Memel, D.N.P., R.N.
Leslie Miller, M.D.
Ryan Moore, L.C.S.W.-C.
Shauna Reinblatt, M.D.
Monique Vardi, L.C.P.C.
Research Coordinators
Mellisha McKitty, B.A.
Alison Newcomer, M.H.S.
DSM-5 Field Trials in Routin e Clinical Practice Settings: 
Collaborating Investigators
Archil Abashidze, M.D.
Francis R. Abueg, Ph.D.
Jennifer Louise Accuardi, M.S.
Balkozar S. Adam, M.D.
Miriam E. Adams, Sc.D., M.S.W., L.I.C.S.W.
Suzanna C. Adams, M.A.
Lawrence Adler, M.D.
Rownak Afroz, M.D.
Khalid I. Afzal, M.D.
Joseph Alimasuya, M.D.
Emily Allen, M.S.
Katherine A. Alle n, L.M.F.T., M.A.
William D. Allen, M.S.
Jafar AlMashat, M.D.
Anthony T. Al onzo, D.M.F.T.
Guillermo Alvarez, B.A., M.A.
Angela Amoia-Lutz, L.M.F.T.
Krista A. Anderson, M.A., L.M.F.T.
Lisa R. Anderson, M.Ed., L.C.P.C.
Pamela M. Anderson, L.M.F.T.
Shannon N. Anderson, M.A., L.P.C., N.C.C.
Eric S. Andrews, M.A.
Vicki Arbuckle, M.S., Nursing(N.P.)
Namita K. Arora, M.D.
Darryl Arrington, M.A.
Bearlyn Y. Ash, M.S.
Wylie J. Bagley, Ph.D.
Kumar D. Bahl, M.D.
Deborah C. Bailey, M.A., M.S., Ph.D.
Carolyn Baird, D.N.P., M.B.A., R.N.-B.C., 
C.A.R.N.-A.P., I.C.C.D.P.D.
Joelle Bangsund M.S.W.
Maria Baratta, M.S.W., Ph.D.
Stan Barnard, M.S.W.
Deborah Barnes, M.S.Margaret L. Barnes, Ph.D.
David Barnum, Ph.D.
Raymond M. Baum, M.D.
Edward Wescott Beal, M.D.
Michelle Beaudoin, M.A.
Ernest E. Beckham, Ph.D.
Lori L. Beckwith, M.Ed
Emmet Bellville, M.A.
Randall E. Bennett, M.A.
Lynn Benson, Ph.D.
Robert Scott Benson, M.D.
Linda Benton, M.S.W.
Ditza D. Berger, Ph.D.
Louise I. Bertman, Ph.D.
Robin Bieber, M.S., L.M.F.T.
Diana M. Bigham, M.A.
David R. Blackburn, Ph.D.
Kelley Blackwell, L.M.F.T.
Lancia Blatchley, B.A., L.M.F.T.
Stacey L. Block, L.M.S.W., A.C.S.W.
Karen J. Bloodworth, M.S., N.C.C., L.P.C.
Lester Bloomenstiel, M.S.
Christine M. Blue, D.O.
Marina Bluvshtein, Ph.D.
Callie Gray Bobbitt, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Moses L. Boone, Jr., L.M.S.W., B.C.D.
Steffanie Boudreau-T homas, M.A.-L.P.C.
Jay L. Boulter, M.A.
Aaron Daniel Bourne, M.A.
Helen F. Bowden, Ph.D.
Aryn Bowley-Safranek, B.S., M.S.
Elizabeth Boyajian, Ph.D.
Beth K. Boyarsky, M.D.
Gail M. Boyd, Ph.D.
Jeffrey M. Brandler, Ed.S., C.A.S., S.A.P.
912 DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors
Sandra L. Branton, Ed.D.
Karen J. Brocco-Kish, M.D.
Kristin Brooks, P.M.H.N.P.
Ann Marie Brown, M.S.W.
Philip Brown, M.S.W.
Kellie Buckner, Ed.S.
Richard Bunt, M.D.
Neil F. Buono, D.Min.
Janice Bureau, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Kimlee Butterfield, M.S.W.
Claudia Byrne, Ph.D.
Quinn Callicott, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Alvaro Camacho, M.D., M.P.H.
Sandra Cambra, Ph.D.
Heather Campbell, M.A.
Nancy Campbell, Ph.D., M.S.W.
Karen Ranee Canada, L.M.F.T.
Joseph P. Cannavo, M.D.
Catherine F. Caporale, Ph.D.
Frederick Capps, Ph.D., M.S.
Rebecca J. Carney, M.B.A., M.A., L.M.H.C.
Kelly J. Carroll, M.S.W.
Richard W. Carroll, Ph.D., L.P.C., A.C.S.
Sherry Casper, Ph.D.
Joseph A. Catania, L.I.S.W.S., L.C.D.C. III
Manisha P. Cavendish, Ph.D.
Kenneth M. Certa, M.D.
Shambhavi Chandraiah, M.D.
Calvin Chatlos, M.D.
Daniel C. Chen, M.D.
Darlene Cheryl, M.S.W.
Matthew R. Chirman, M.S.
Carole A. Chisholm, M.S.W.
Shobha A. Chottera, M.D.
Joseph Logue Christenson, M.D.
Pamela Christy, Psy.D.
Sharon M. Freeman Clevenger, Ph.D., 
P.M.H.C.N.S.-B.C.
Mary Ann Cohen, M.D.
Mitchell J. Cohen, M.D.
Diego L. Coira, M.D.
Melinda A. Lawless Coker, Psy.D.
Carol Cole, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Caron Collins, M.A., L.M.F.T.
Wanda Collins, M.S.N.
Linda Cook Cason, M.A.
Ayanna Cooke-Chen, M.D., Ph.D.
Heidi B. Cooperstein, D.O.
Ileana Corbelle, M.S.W.
Kimberly Corbett, Psy.D.
Angelina Cordova, M.A.Ed.
Jennifer Carol Cox, L.P.C.
Sheree Cox, M.A., R.N., N.C.C., D.C.C., 
L.M.H.C.
William Frederick Cox, M.D.
Sally M. Cox, M.S.Ed.
Debbie Herman Crane, M.S.W.
Arthur Ray Crawford, III, Ph.D.Roula Creighton, M.D.
John R. Crossfield, L.M.H.C.
Sue Cutbirth, R.N., M.S.N, C.S., P.M.H.N.P.
Marco Antonio Cuyar, M.S.
Rebecca Susan Daily, M.D.
Lori S. Danenberg, Ph.D.
Chan Dang-Vu, M.D.
Mary Hynes Danielak, Psy.D.
Cynthia A. Darby, M.Ed., Ed.S.
Douglas Darnall, Ph.D.
Christopher Davidson, M.D.
Doreen Davis, Ph.D., L.C.S.W.
Sandra Davis, Ph.D., L.M.H.C., N.C.C.
Walter Pitts Davis, M.Th.
Christian J. Dean, Ph.D.
Kent Dean, Ph.D.
Elizabeth Dear, M.A.
Shelby DeBause, M.A.
Rebecca B. DeLaney, M.S.S.W., L.C.S.W., B.C.D.
John R. Delatorre, M.A.
Frank DeLaurentis, M.D.
Eric Denner, M.A., M.B.A.
Mary Dennihan, L.M.F.T.
Kenny Dennis, M.A.
Pamela L. Detrick, Ph.D., M.S., F.N.P.-B.C., 
P.M.H.N.P.-B.C., R.N.-B.C., C.A.P., 
G.C.A.C.
Robert Detrinis, M.D.
Daniel A. Deutschman, M.D.
Tania Diaz, Psy.D.
Sharon Dobbs, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
David Doreau, M.Ed.
Gayle L. Dosher, M.A.
D'Ann Downey, Ph.D., M.S.W.
Beth Doyle, M.A.
Amy J. Driskill, M.S., L.C.M.F.T.
James Drury, M.D.
Brenda-Lee Duarte, M.Ed.
Shane E. Dulemba, M.S.N.
Nancy R. G. Dunbar, M.D.
Cathy Duncan, M.A.
Rebecca S. Dunn, M.S.N., A.R.N.P.
Debbie Earnshaw, M.A.
Shawna Eddy-Kissell, M.A.
Momen El Nesr, M.D.
Jeffrey Bruce Elliott, Psy.D.
Leslie Ellis, Ph.D.
Donna M. Emfield, L.C.P.C.
Gretchen S. Enright, M.D.
John C. Espy, Ph.D.
Renuka Evani, M.B.B.S., M.D.
Heather Evans, M.S.Ed, L.P.C.N.C.C.
Cesar A. Fabiani, M.D.
Fahim Fahim, M.D.
Samuel Fam, M.D.
Edward H. Fankhanel, Ph.D., Ed.D.
Tamara Farmer, M.S.N, A.R.N.P.
Farida Farzana, M.D.
DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors 913
Philip Fast, M.S.
Patricia Feltrup-Exum, M.A.M.F.T.
Hector J. Fernandez-Barillas, Ph.D.
Julie Ferry, M.S.W., L.I.C.S.W.
Jane Fink, Ph.D., M.S.S.A.
Kathy Finkle, L.P.C.M.H.
Steven Finlay, Ph.D.
Rik Fire, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Ann Flood, Ph.D.
Jeanine Lee Foreman, M.S.
Thyra Fossum, Ph.D.
Karen S. Franklin, L.I.C.S.W.
Sherre K. Franklin, M.A.
Helen R. Frey, M.A., E.D.
Michael L. Freytag, B.S., M.A.
Beth Gagnon, M.S.W.
Patrice L.R. Gallagher, Ph.D.
Angela J. Gallien, M.A.
Robert Gallo, M.S.W.
Mario Galvarino, M.D.
Vladimir I. Gasca, M.D.
Joshua Gates, Ph.D.
Anthony Gaudioso, Ph.D.
Michelle S. Gauthier, A.P.R.N., M.S.N, 
P.M.H.N.P.-B.C.
Rachel E. Gearhart, L.C.S.W.
Stephen D. Gelfond, M.D.
Nancy S. Gerow, M.S.
Michael J. Gerson, Ph.D.
Susan M. A. Geyer, L.M.S.W.
Lorrie Gfeller-Strouts, Ph.D.
Shubu Ghosh, M.D.
Richard Dorsey Gillespie, M.Div.
Stuart A. Gitlin, M.S.S.A.
Jeannette E. Given, Ph.D.
Frances Gizzi, L.C.S.W.
Stephen I. Glicksman, Ph.D.
Martha Glisky, Ph.D.
Sonia Godbole, M.D.
Howard M. Gold fischer, Psy.D.
Mary Jane Gonzalez-Huss, Ph.D.
Michael I. Good, M.D.
Dawn Goodman-Martin, M.A.-L.M.H.C.
Robert Gorkin, Ph.D., M.D.
Jeff Gorski, M.S.W.
Linda O. Graf, M.Ed., L.C.P.C.
Ona Graham, Psy.D.
Aubrie M. Graves, L.M.S.W., C.A.S.A.C.
Howard S. Green, M.D.
Karen Torry Green, M.S.W.
Gary Greenberg, Ph.D.
Marjorie Greenhut, M.A. 
James L. Greenstone, Ed.D., J.D.
Raymond A. Griffin, Ph.D.
Joseph Grillo, Ph.D.
Janeane M. Grisez, A.A., B.A.
Lawrence S. Gross, M.D.
Robert J. Gross, M.D.Sally J. Grosscup, Ph.D.
Philip A. Grossi, M.D.
Gabrielle Guedet, Ph.D.
Nicholas Guenzel, B.A., B.S., M.S.N.
Mary G. Hales, M.A.
Tara C. Haley, M.S., L.M.F.T.
John D. Hall, M.D.
Amy Hammer, M.S.W.
Michael S. Hanau, M.D.
Linda K.W. Hansen, M.A., L.P.
Genevieve R. Hansler, M.S.W.
Mary T. Harring ton, L.C.S.W.
Lois Hartman, Ph.D.
Steven Lee Hartsock, Ph.D., M.S.W.
Victoria Ann Harwood, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Rossi A. Hassad, Ph.D., M.P.H.
Erin V. Hatcher, M.S.N.
Richard L. Hauger, M.D.
Kimberly M. Haverly, M.A. 
Gale Eisner Heater, M.S., M.F.T.
Katlin Hecox, M.A.
Brenda Heideman, M.S.W.
Melinda Heinen, M.Sc.
Marie-Therese Heitkamp, M.S.
Melissa B. Held, M.A.
Jessica Hellings, M.D.
Bonnie Helmick-O'Brien, M.A., L.M.F.T.
MaLinda T. Henderson, M.S.N, F.P.M.H.N.P.
Gwenn Herman, M.S.W.
Martha W. Hernandez, M.S.N, A.P.R.N., 
P.M.H.C.N.S.
Robin L. Hewitt, M.S.
Kenneth Hoffman, Ph.D.
Patricia E. Hogan, D.O.
Peggy Holcomb, Ph.D.
Garland H. Holloman, Jr., M.D.
Kimberly Huegel, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Jason Hughes, L.P.C.-S., N.C.C.
Jennifer C. Hughes, Ph.D., M.S.W., L.I.S.W.-S.
Michelle K. Humke, M.A.
Judith G. Hunt, L.M.F.T.
Tasneem Hussainee, M.D.
Sharlene J. Hutchinson, M.S.N.
Muhammad Ikram, M.D.
Sunday Ilechukwu, M.D., D.Psy. Cli.
Douglas H. Ingram, M.D.
Marilynn Irvine, Ph.D.
Marjorie Isaacs, Psy.D.
Raymond Isackila, Ed.S., P.C.C.-S., L.I.C.D.C.
Mohammed A. Issa, M.D.
John L. Jankord, M.A.
Barbara P. Jannah, L.C.S.W.
C. Stuart Johnson, M.S.
Dawn M. Johnson, M.A.
Deanna V. Johnson, M.S., A.P.R.N., B.C.
Eric C. Johnson, M.F.T.
Joy Johnson, Ph.D., L.C.S.W.
Willard Johnson, Ph.D.
914 DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors
Xenia Johnson-Bhembe, M.D.
Vann S. Joines, Ph.D.
Margaret Jones, Psy.D.
Patricia Jorgenson, M.S.W.
Steven M. Joseph, M.D.
Taylere Joseph, M.A.
Jeanette M. Joyner-Craddock, M.S.S.W.
Melissa Kachapis, M.A.
Charles T. Kaelber, M.D.
Aimee C. Kaempf, M.D.
Peter Andrew Kahn, M.D.
Robert P. Kahn-Rose, M.D.
Maher Karam-Hage, M.D.
Todd H. Kasdan, M .D.
Karen Kaufman,  M.S., L.M.F.T.
Rhesa Kaulia, M.A., M.F.T.
Debbie Lynn Kelly, M.S.N, P.M.H.N.P.-B.C.
W. Stephen Kelly, Ph.D.
Selena Kennedy, M.A.
Judith A. Kenney, M.S., L.P.C.
Mark Patrick Kerekes, M.D.
Alyse Kerr, M.S., N.C.C., N.A.D.D.-C.C., L.P.C.
Karen L. Kerschmann, L.C.S.W.
Marcia Kesner, M.S.
Ashan Khan, Ph.D.
Shaukat Khan, M.D.
Audrey Khatchikian, Ph.D.
Laurie B. Kimmel, M.S.W.
Jason H. King, Ph.D.
Nancy Leigh King, M.S.W., L.C.S.W., L.C.A.S.
Kyle Kinne, M.S.C
Cassandra M. Klyman, M.D.
David R. Knapp, L.C.S.W.
Margaret Knerr, M.S.
Michael R. Knox, Ph.D.
Carolyn Koblin, M.S.
Valerie Kolbert, M.S., A.R.N.P.-B.C.
Heather Koontz, M.S.W.
Faye Koop, Ph.D., L.C.M.F.T.
Fern M. Kopakin, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Joel Kotin, M.D.
Sharlene K. Kraemer, M.S.E.
Marjorie Vego Krausz, M.A., Ed.D.
Nancy J. Krell, M.S.W.
Mindy E. Kronenberg, Ph.D.
Dwayne Kruse, M.S., M.F.T.
Ajay S. Kuchibhatla, M.D.
Shubha N. Kumar, M.D.
Helen H. Kyomen, M.D., M.S.
Rebecca M. Lachut, M.Ed., Ed.S.
Alexis Lake, M.S.S.
Ramaswamy Lakshmanan, M.D.
Brigitta Lalone, L.C.S.W.-R
John W. Lancaster, Ph.D.
Patience R. Land, L.I.C.S.W., M.S.W., M.P.A.
Amber Lange, M.A., Ph.D.
Jeff K. Larsen, M.A.
Nathan E. Lavid, M.D.Michelle Leader, Ph.D.
Stephen E. Lee, M.D.
Cathryn L. Leff, Ph.D., L.M.F.T.
Rachael Kollar Leombruno, L.M.F.T.
Arlene I. Lev, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.-R
Gregory K. Lewis, M.A.-L.M.F.T.
Jane Hart Lewis, M.S.
Melissa S. Lewis, M.S.W., L.I.C.S.W.
Norman Gerald Lewis, F.R.A.N.Z.C.P.
Robin Joy Lewis, Ph.D.
Ryan Michael Ley, M.D.
Tammy R. Lias, M.A.
Russell F. Lim, M.D.
Jana Lincoln, M.D.
Ted Lindberg, L.M.S.W., L.M.F.T., M.S.W.
Peggy Solow Liss, M.S.W.
Andrea Loeb, Psy.D.
William David Lohr, M.D.
Mary L. Ludy, M.A., L.M.H.C., L.M.F.T.
Nathan Lundin, M.A., L.P.C.
Veena Luthra, M.D.
Patti Lyerly, L.C.S.W.
Denise E. Maas, M.A.
Silvia MacAllister, L.M.F.T.
Nicola MacCallum, M.S., M.F.C. Therapy
Colin N. MacKenzie, M.D.
Cynthia Mack-Ernsdorff, Ph.D.
John R. Madsen-Bibeau, M.S., M.Div
Christopher J. Maglio, Ph.D.
Deepak Mahajan, M.D.
Debra Majewski, M.A.
Harish Kumar Malhotra, M.D.
Pamela Marcus, R.N., M.S.
Mary P. Marshall, Ph.D.
Flora Lynne Martin, M.A., L.P.C., A.D.C.
Robert S. Martin, M.D.
Jennifer L. Martinez, M.S.
Ninfa Martinez-Aguilar, M.A., M.F.T.
Emily Martinsen, M.S.W.
Farhan A. Matin, M.D.
Janus Maybee, P.M.H.N.P.
Karen Mazarin-Stanek, M.A.
Eben L. McClenahan, M.D., M.S.
Jerlyn C. McCleod, M.D.
Susan E. McCue, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Kent D. McDonald, M.S.
Daniel McDonnell, M.S.N, P.M.H.-N.P.
Robert McElhose, Ph.D.
Lisa D. McGrath, Ph.D.
Mark McGrosky, M.S.W.
Katherine M. McKay, Ph.D.
Darren D. McKinnis, M.S.W.
Mona McNelis-Broadley, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Rick McQuistion, Ph.D.
Susan Joy Mendelsohn, Psy.D.
Barbara S. Menninga, M.Ed.
Hindi Mermelstein, M.D., F.A.P.M.
Rachel B. Mich aelsen, M.S.W.
DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors 915
Thomas F. Micka, M.D.
Tonya Miles, Psy.D.
Matthew Miller, M.S.
Michael E. Miller, M.D.
Noel Miller, L.M.S.W., M.B.A., M.P.S.
Kalpana Miriyala, M.D.
Sandra Moenssens, M.S.
Erin Mokhtar, M.A.
Robert E. Montgomery, M.Ed.
Susan Moon, M.A.
Theresa K. Moon, M.D.
David B. Moore, B.A., M.Div., M.S.S.W., Ph.D.
Joanne M. Moore, M.S.
Peter I. M. Moran, M.B.B.Ch.
Anna Moriarty, M.P.S., L.P.C., L.M.H.C.
Richard Dean Morris, M.A.
Michael M. Morrison, M.A.
Carlton E. Munson, Ph.D.
Timothy A. Murphy, M.D.
Beth L. Murphy, Psy.D.
Melissa A. Myers, M.D.
Stefan Nawab, M.D.
Allyson Matney Neal, D.N.P.
Steven Nicholas, M.A.
Aurelian N. Niculescu, M.D.
Earl S. Nielsen, Ph.D.
Terry Oleson, Ph.D.
Julianne R. Oliver, B.S., M.S., Ph.D.
Robert O. Olsen, M.D.
Amy O'Neill, M.D.
Oscar H. Oo, Psy.D., A.B.P.P.
Laurie Orlando, J.D., M.A.
Jill Osborne, M.S., Ed.S.
Kimberly Overlie, M.S.
L. Kola Oyewumi, Ph.D.
Zachary J. Pa cha, M.S.W.
Suzette R. Papadakis, M.S.
Amanda C. Parsons, M.A., L.P.C.C.
Lee R. Pate, B.A., M.A.
Eric L. Patterson, L.P.C.
Sherri Paulson, M.Ed., L.S.C.W.
Peter Dennis Pautz, B.A., M.S.W.
Malinda J. Perkins, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Eleanor F. Perlman, M.S.W.
Deborah K. Perry, M.S.W.
Amanda Peterman, L.M.F.T.
Shawn Pflugardt, Psy.D.
Robert J. Dean Phillips, M.S.
Laura Pieper, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Lori D. Pink, M.S.W., B.C.D
Michael G. Pipich, M.S., L.M.F.T.
Cynthia G. Pizzulli, M.S.W., Ph.D.
Kathy C. Points, M.A.
Marya E. Pollack, M.D., M.P.H.
Sanford E. Pomerantz, M.D.
Eva Ponder, M.S.W., Psy.D.
Ernest Poortinga, M.D.
David Post, M.D.Laura L. Post, M.D., Ph.D., J.D.
Patrick W. Powell, Ed.D.
Beth M. Prewett, Psy.D.
Robert Price, D.C.C., M.Ed.
John Pruett, M.D.
Aneita S. Radov, M.A.
Dawn M. Raffa, Ph.D.
Kavitha Raja, M.D.
Ranjit Ram, M.D.
Mohamed Ibrahim Ramadan, M.D., M.S.
Christopher S. Randolph, M.D.
Nancy Rappaport, M.Ed.
John Moir Rauenhorst, M.D.
Laurel Jean Rebenstock, L.M.S.W.
Edwin Renaud, Ph.D.
Heather J. Rhodes, M.A.
Jennifer S. Ritchie-Goodline, Psy.D.
Daniel G. Roberts, M.A.
Brenda Rohren, M.A., M.F.S., L.I.M.H.P., 
L.A.D.C., M.A.C.
Donna G. Rolin-Kenny, Ph.D., A.P.R.N., 
P.M.H.C.N.S.-B.C.
Sylvia E. Rosario, M.Ed.
Mindy S. Rosenbloom, M.D.
Harvey A. Rosenstock, M.D.
Thalia Ross, M.S.S.W.
Fernando Rosso, M.D.
Barry H. Roth, M.D.
Thomas S. Rue, M.A., L.M.H.C.
Elizabeth Ruegg, L.C.S.W.
Diane Rullo, Ph.D.
Angie Rumaldo, Ph.D.
Eric Rutberg, M.A., D.H.Ed.
Joseph A. Sabella, L.M.H.C.
Kemal Sagduyu, M.D.
Adam H. Saltz, M.S.W.
Jennifer A. Samardak, L.I.S.W.-S.
George R. Samuels, M.A., M.S.W.
Carmen Sanjurjo, M.A.
John S. Saroyan, Ed.D.
Brigid Kathleen Sboto, M.A., M.F.T.
Lori Cluff Schade, M.S.
Joan E. Schaper, M.S.N.
Rae J. Schilling, Ph.D.
Larry Schor, Ph.D.
Donna J. Schwartz, M.S.W., L.I.C.S.W.
Amy J. Schwarzenbart, P.M.H.-C.N.S., B.C., 
A.P.N.P.
John V. Scialli, M.D.
Chad Scott, Ph.D., L.P.C.C.
Sabine Sell, M.F.T.
Minal Shah, N.S., N.C.C., L.P.C.
Lynn Shell, M.S.N.
Dharmesh Navi n Sheth, M.D.
S. Christopher Shim, M.D.
Marta M. Shinn, Ph.D.
Andreas Sidiropoulos, M.D., Ph.D.
Michael Siegell, M.D.
916 DSM-5 Advisors and Other Contributors
Michael G. Simonds, Psy.D.
Gagandeep Singh, M.D.
Melissa Rae Skrzypchak, M.S.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Paula Slater, M.D.
William Bill Slaughter, M.D., M.A.
Aki Smith, Ph.D.
Deborah L. Smith, Ed.M.
Diane E. Smith, M.A., L.M.F.T.
James S. Sommer, M.S. 
J. Richard Spatafora, M.D.
Judy Splittgerber, M.S.N., C.S., N.P.
Thiruneermalai T.G. Sriram, M.D.
Martha W. St. John, M.D.
Sybil Stafford, Ph.D.
Timothy Stambaugh, M.A.
Laura A. Stamboni, M.S.W.
Carol L. R. Stark, M.D.
Stephanie Steinman, M.S.
Claudia M. Stevens, M.S.W.
Jennifer Boyer Stevens, Psy.D.
Dominique Stevens-Young, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Kenneth Stewart, Ph.D.
Daniel Storch, M.D.
Suzanne Straebler, A.P.R.N.
Dawn Stremel, M.A., L.M.F.T.
Emel Stroup, Psy.D.
John W. Stump, M.S., L.M.F.T.
Thomas G. Suk, M.A.
Elizabeth Sunzeri, M.S.
Linnea Swanson, M.A., Psy.D.
Patricia Swanson, M.A.
Fereidoon Taghizadeh, M.D.
Bonnie L. Tardif, L.M.H.C., N.C.C., B.C.P.C.C.
Joan Tavares, M.S.W.
Ann Taylor, M.S.W.
Dawn O'Dwyer Taylor, Ph.D.
Chanel V. Tazza, L.M.H.C.
Martha H. Teater, M.A.
Clark D. Terrell, M.D.
Mark R. Thelen, Psy.D.
Norman E. Thibault, M.S., Ph.D.
Tojuana L. Thomason, Ph.D.
Paula Thomson, Psy.D.
D. Chadwick Thompson, M.A.
Susan Thorne-Devin, A.M.
Jean Eva Thumm, M.A.P.C., M.A.T., L.M.F.T., 
B.C.C.
James E. Tille, Ph.D., D.Min.
Jacalyn G. Tippey, Ph.D.
Saraswathi Tirumalasetty, M.D.
Jacqueline A. Torrance, M.S.
Terrence Trobaugh, M.S.
Louisa V. Troemel, Psy.D., L.M.F.T.Susan Ullman, M.S.W.
Jennifer M. Underwood, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Rodney Dale Veldhuizen, M.A.
Michelle Voegels, B.S.N., M.S.N., B.C.
Wess Vogt, M.D.
R. Christopher Votolato, Psy.D.
John W. Waid, Ph.D.
Christa A. Wallis, M.A.
Dominique Walmsley, M.A.
Bhupinder Singh Waraich, M.D.
Joseph Ward, N.C.C., L.P.C. M.Ed.
Robert Ward, M.S.W.
Marilee L. M. Wasell, Ph.D.
Gannon J. Watts, L.P.C.-S., L.A.C., N.C.C., 
N.C.S.C., A.A.D.C., I.C.A.A.D.C.
Sheila R. Webster, M.A., M.S.S.A.
Burton Weiss, M.D.
Dennis V. Weiss, M.D.
Jonathan S. Weiss, M.D.
Richard  Wendel, Ph.D.
Paul L. West, Ed.D.
Kris Sandra Wheatley, M.A., L.P.C., N.C.C.
Leneigh White, M.A.
Danny R. Whitehead, L.I.C.S.W.
Jean Whitinger, M.A.
Peter D. Wilk, M.D.
Vanessa Wilkinson, L.P.C.
Tim F. Willia, M.S., M.A.Ed., L.P.C.
Cathy E. Willis, M.A., L.M.F.T., C.A.D.C.
Jeffery John Wilson, M.D.
Jacquie Wilson, M.Ed.
David D. Wines, M.S.W.
Barbara A. Wirebaugh, M.S.W.
Daniel L. Wise, Ph.D.
Christina Wong, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Susanna Wood, M.S.W., L.C.S.W.
Linda L. Woodall, M.D.
Leoneen Woodard-Faust, M.D.
Sheryl E. Woodhouse, L.M.F.T.
Gregory J. Worthington, Psy.D.
Tanya Wozniak, M.D.
Kimberly Isaac Wright, M.A.
Peter Yamamoto, M.D.
Maria Ruiza Ang Yee, M.D.
Michael B. Zafrani, M.D.
Jafet E. Gonzalez Zakarchenco, M.D.
John Zibert, Ph.D.
Karen Zilberstein, M.S.W.
Cathi Zillmann, C.P.N.P., N.P.P.
Gerald A. Zimmerman, Ph.D.
Michele Zimmerman, M.A., P.M.H.C.N.S.-B.C.
Judith A. Zink, M.A.
Vanderbilt University REDCap Team
Paul Harris, Ph.D.
Sudah Kashyap, B.E.
Brenda MinorJon Scherdin, M.A.
Rob Taylor, M.A.
Janey Wang, M.S.
917Index 
Page numbers printed in boldface  type  refer to tables.
Abuse and neglect, 22, 717–722
adult maltreatment and neglect problems, 
720–722
child maltreatment and neglect problems, 
717–719
Access to medica l and other health care, problems 
related to, 726
Acute dissociative reacti ons to stressful events, 
306–307
Acute stress disorder, 265, 280–286
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
283–284
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 285
development and course of, 284
diagnostic criteria for, 280–281
diagnostic features of, 281–283
differential diagnosis of, 285–286
functional consequences of, 285
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 285
prevalence of, 284
risk and prognostic factors for, 284–285
Addiction. See Substance-related and addictive 
disorders
ADHD. See Attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder
Adjustment disorders, 265, 286–289
comorbidity with, 289
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 288
development and course of, 287
diagnostic criteria for, 286–287
diagnostic features of, 287
differential diagnosis of, 288–289
functional consequences of, 288
prevalence of, 287
risk and prognostic factors for, 288
Adjustment-like disorders, 289
Adult maltreatment and neglect problems, 720–
722
adult abuse by nonspouse or nonpartner, 722
spouse or partner abuse, psychological, 721–
722
spouse or partner neglect, 721
spouse or partner violence, physical, 720
spouse or partner violence, sexual, 720Agoraphobia, 190, 217–221
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
219
comorbidity with, 221
development and course of, 219–220
diagnostic criteria for, 217–218
diagnostic features of, 218–219
differential diagnosis of, 220–221
functional consequences of, 220
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 220
prevalence of, 219
risk and prognostic factors for, 220
Akathisia, medication-induced, 22
acute, 711
tardive, 712
Alcohol intoxication, 497–499
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
497–498
comorbidity with, 499
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 498
development and course of, 498
diagnostic criteria for, 497
diagnostic features of, 497
diagnostic markers for, 499
differential diagnosis of, 499
functional consequences of, 499
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 498
prevalence of, 498
risk and prognostic factors for, 498
Alcohol-related disorders, 481, 490–503
alcohol intoxication, 497–499
alcohol use disorder, 490–497
alcohol withdrawal, 484, 499–501
diagnoses associated with, 482
other alcohol-induced disorders, 502–503
development and course of, 502–503
features of, 502
unspecified alcohol-related disorder, 503
Alcohol use disorder, 490–497
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
492–493
comorbidity with, 496–497
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 494–495
development and course of, 493–494
918 Index
Alcohol use disorder (continued)
diagnostic criteria for, 490–491
diagnostic features of, 492
diagnostic markers for, 495–496
differential diagnosis of, 496
functional consequences of, 496
prevalence of, 493
risk and prognostic factors for, 494
specifiers for, 492
Alcohol withdrawal, 499–501
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 500
comorbidity with, 501
development and course of, 501
diagnostic criteria for, 499–500
diagnostic features of, 500
diagnostic markers for, 501
differential diagnosis of, 501
functional consequences of, 501
prevalence of, 501
risk and prognostic factors for, 501
specifiers for, 500
Alzheimer’s disease, major or mild 
neurocognitive disorder due to, 591, 603, 
611–614
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 612
comorbidity with, 614
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 613
development and course of, 612–613
diagnostic criteria for, 611–612
diagnostic features of, 612
diagnostic markers for, 613
differential diagnosis of, 614
functional consequences of, 614
prevalence of, 612
risk and prognostic factors for, 613
American Psychiatric Association (APA), 5–7
Anorexia nervosa, 329, 338–345
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 341
atypical, 353
comorbidity with, 344–345
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 342
development and course of, 341–342
diagnostic criteria for, 338–339
diagnostic features of, 339–340
diagnostic markers for, 342–343
differential diagnosis of, 344
functional consequences of, 343
prevalence of, 341
risk and prognostic factors for, 342
subtypes of, 339
suicide risk in, 343
Antidepressant discontinuation syndrome, 22, 
712–714
comorbidity with, 714
course and development of, 713diagnostic features of, 713
differential diagnosis of, 713–714
prevalence of, 713
Antisocial personality disorder, 461, 476, 645, 646, 
659–663
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
660–661
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 662
development and course of, 661
diagnostic criteria for, 659
diagnostic features of, 659–660
differential diagnosis of, 662–663
features and criteria in alternative DSM-5 
model for personality disorders, 763, 
764–765
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 662
prevalence of, 661
risk and prognostic factors for, 661–662
Anxiety disorder due to another medical 
condition, 190, 230–232
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
231
development and course of, 231
diagnostic criteria for, 230
diagnostic features of, 230–231
diagnostic markers for, 231
differential diagnosis of, 231–232
prevalence of, 231
Anxiety disorders, 189–264
agoraphobia, 190, 217–221
anxiety disorder due to another medical 
condition, 190, 230–232
generalized anxiety disorder, 190, 222–226
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
811
other specified anxiety disorder, 233
panic attack specifier, 214–217
panic disorder, 190, 208–214
selective mutism, 189, 195–197
separation anxiety disorder, 189, 190–195
social anxiety disorder (social phobia), 190, 
202–208
specific phobia, 189–190, 197–202
substance/medication-induced anxiety 
disorder, 190, 226–230
unspecified anxiety disorder, 233
APA (American Psychiatric Association), 5–7
Assessment measures, 23–24, 733–748
cross-cutting symptom measures, 733–741
DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom 
Measure, 734–736, 738–741
DSM-5 Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom 
Measures, 734, 735, 736, 737
frequency of use of, 737
severity measures, 733, 742
Index 919
Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis 
Symptom Severity, 742–744
frequency of use of, 742
scoring and interpretation of, 742
WHO Disability Assessment Schedule 
(WHODAS), 16, 21, 734, 745–748
Ataque de nervios,  14, 211–212, 233, 833
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD), 11, 32, 59–66
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 61
comorbidity with, 65
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 62
development and course of, 61
diagnostic criteria for, 59–61
diagnostic features of, 61
differential diagnosis of, 63–65
functional consequences of, 63
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 63
medication-induced symptoms of, 65
other specified attentio n-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder, 65–66
prevalence of, 61
risk and prognostic factors for, 62
unspecified attention- deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder, 66
Attenuated psychosis syndrome, 122, 783–786
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 784
comorbidity with, 786
development and course of, 785
diagnostic features of, 783–784
differential diagnosis of, 785–786
functional consequences of, 785
prevalence of, 784–785
proposed criteria for, 783
risk and prognostic factors for, 785
Autism spectrum disorder, 31–32, 50–59
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 55
comorbidity with, 58–59
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 57
development and course of, 55–56
diagnostic criteria for, 50–51
diagnostic features of, 53–55
differential diagnosis of, 57–58
functional consequences of, 57
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 57
prevalence of, 55
recording procedures for, 51
risk and prognostic factors for, 56–57
specifiers for, 51–53, 52
Avoidant personality disorder, 645, 646, 672–675
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
673–674
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 674
development and course of, 674
diagnostic criteria for, 672–673diagnostic features of, 673
differential diagnosis of, 674–675
features and criteria in alternative DSM-5 
model for personality disorders, 763, 
765–766
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 674
prevalence of, 674
Avoidant/restrictive food  intake disorder, 329, 
334–338
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 335
comorbidity with, 338
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 336
development and course of, 335–336
diagnostic criteria for, 334
diagnostic features of, 334–335
diagnostic markers for, 336
differential diagnosis of, 336–338
functional consequences of, 336
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 336
risk and prognostic factors for, 336
Bereavement, 125–126, 134, 155, 161, 194
persistent complex, 289, 789–792
Binge-eating disorder, 329, 350–353
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 351
comorbidity with, 353
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 352
development and course of, 352
diagnostic criteria for, 350
diagnostic features of, 350–351
differential diagnosis of, 352–353
functional consequences of, 352
of low frequency and/or limited duration, 353
prevalence of, 351
risk and prognostic factors for, 352
Bipolar I disorder, 123–132
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 129
comorbidity with, 132
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 130
development and course of, 130
diagnostic criteria for, 123–127
diagnostic features of, 127–129
differential diagnosis of, 131–132
functional consequences of, 131
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 130
prevalence of, 130
risk and prognostic factors for, 130
suicide risk and, 131
Bipolar II disorder, 123, 132–139
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 136
comorbidity with, 139
development and course of, 136–137
diagnostic criteria for, 132–135
diagnostic features of, 135–136
differential diagnosis of, 138–139
920 Index
Bipolar II disorder (continued)
functional consequences of, 138
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 137
prevalence of, 136
risk and prognostic factors for, 137
suicide risk in, 138
Bipolar and related disorder due to another 
medical condition, 123, 145–147
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 146
comorbidity with, 147
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 147
development and course of, 146–147
diagnostic criteria for, 145–146
diagnostic features of, 146
diagnostic markers for, 147
differential diagnosis of, 147
functional consequences of, 147
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 147
Bipolar and related disorders, 123–154
bipolar I disorder, 123–132
bipolar II disorder, 123, 132–139
bipolar and related disorder due to another 
medical condition, 123, 145–147
cyclothymic disorder, 123, 139–141
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
810
other specified bipolar and related disorder, 
123, 148
specifiers for, 149–154
substance/medication-induced bipolar and 
related disorder, 123, 142–145
unspecified bipolar and related disorder, 149
Body dysmorphic disorder, 235, 236, 242–247
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 244
comorbidity with, 247
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 245
development and course of, 244
diagnostic criteria for, 242–243
diagnostic features of, 243–244
differential diagnosis of, 245–247
functional consequences of, 245
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 245
prevalence of, 244
risk and prognostic factors for, 245
suicide risk and, 245
Body dysmorphic-like disorder with actual flaws, 
263
Body dysmorphic-like disorder without repetitive 
behaviors, 263
Body-focused repetitive behavior disorder, 235, 
263–264
Borderline personality disorder, 645, 646, 663–666
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 665
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 665–666
development and course of, 665diagnostic criteria for, 663
diagnostic features of, 663–664
differential diagnosis of, 666
features and criteria in alternative DSM-5 
model for personality disorders, 763, 
766–767
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 666
prevalence of, 665
risk and prognostic factors for, 665
Breathing-related sleep disorders, 361, 378–390
central sleep apnea, 383–386
obstructive sleep ap nea hypopnea, 378–383
sleep-related hypoventilation, 387–390
Brief illness anxiety disorder, 327
Brief psychotic disorder, 94–96
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 95
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 95
development and course of, 95
diagnostic criteria for, 94
diagnostic features of, 94–95
differential diagnosis of, 96
duration of, 89, 94, 99
functional consequences of, 95
prevalence of, 95
risk and prognostic factors for, 95
Brief somatic symptom disorder, 327
Bulimia nervosa, 329, 345–350
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 347
comorbidity with, 349–350
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 348
development and course of, 347–348
diagnostic criteria for, 345
diagnostic features of, 345–347
diagnostic markers for, 348
differential diagnosis of, 349
functional consequences of, 349
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 348
of low frequency and/or limited duration, 353
prevalence of, 347
risk and prognostic factors for, 348
suicide risk in, 349
Caffeine intoxication, 503–506
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 504
comorbidity with, 506
development and course of, 505
diagnostic criteria for, 503–504
diagnostic features of, 504
differential diagnosis of, 505
functional consequences of, 505
prevalence of, 505
risk and prognostic factors for, 505
Caffeine-related disorders, 481, 503–509
caffeine intoxication, 503–506
caffeine withdrawal, 506–508
Index 921
diagnoses associated with, 482
other caffeine-indu ced disorders, 508
unspecified caffeine- related disorder, 509
Caffeine use disorder, 792–795
comorbidity with, 795
development and course of, 794
diagnostic features of, 793–794
differential diagnosis of, 795
functional consequences of, 794–795
prevalence of, 794
proposed criteria for, 792–793
risk and prognostic factors for, 794
Caffeine withdrawal, 506–508
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 507
comorbidity with, 508
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 508
development and course of, 507
diagnostic criteria for, 506
diagnostic features of, 506–507
differential diagnosis of, 508
functional consequences of, 508
prevalence of, 507
risk and prognostic factors for, 507–508
Cannabis intoxication, 516–517
diagnostic criteria for, 516
diagnostic features of, 516–517
differential diagnosis of, 517
functional consequences of, 517
prevalence of, 517
specifiers for, 516
Cannabis-related disorders, 481, 509–519
cannabis intoxication, 516–517
cannabis use disorder, 509–516
cannabis withdrawal, 484, 517–519
diagnoses associated with, 482
other cannabis-induced disorders, 519
unspecified cannabis-related disorder, 519
Cannabis use disorder, 509–516
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 512
comorbidity with, 515–516
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 514
development and course of, 513
diagnostic criteria for, 509–510
diagnostic features of, 510–512
diagnostic markers for, 514
functional consequences of, 514–515
prevalence of, 512
risk and prognostic factors for, 513–514
specifiers for, 510
Cannabis withdrawal, 517–519
development and course of, 518
diagnostic criteria for, 517–518
diagnostic features of, 518
differential diagnosis of, 519
risk and prognostic factors for, 519Case formulation, 19–20
cultural, 749–759 ( See also  Cultural 
formulation)
Catatonia, 89, 119–121
associated with another mental disorder 
(catatonia specifier), 119–120
diagnostic criteria for, 119–120
diagnostic features of, 120
unspecified, 89, 121
Catatonic disorder due to another medical 
condition, 120–121
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 121
diagnostic criteria for, 120–121
diagnostic features of, 121
differential diagnosis of, 121
Central sleep apnea, 383–386
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 385
comorbidity with, 386
development and course of, 385
diagnostic criteria for, 383–384
diagnostic features of, 384–385
diagnostic markers for, 385
differential diagnosis of, 386
functional consequences of, 386
prevalence of, 385
risk and prognostic factors for, 385
specifiers for, 384
subtypes of, 384
CFI. See Cultural Formulation Interview
Cheyne-Stokes breathing, 383–386. See also  Central 
sleep apnea
Childhood-onset fluency di sorder (stuttering), 31, 
45–47
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 46
development and course of, 46–47
diagnostic criteria for, 45–46
diagnostic features of, 46
differential diagnosis of, 47
functional consequences of, 47
risk and prognostic factors for, 47
Child maltreatment and neglect problems, 717–719
child neglect, 718–719
child physical abuse, 717–718
child psychological abuse, 719
child sexual abuse, 718
Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, 361, 
390–398
advanced sleep phase type, 393–394
associated features supporting diagnosis 
of, 393
comorbidity with, 394
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 394
development and course of, 393
diagnostic features of, 393
diagnostic markers for, 394
922 Index
Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders 
(continued)
advanced sleep phase type (continued)
differential diagnosis of, 394
functional consequences of, 394
prevalence of, 393
risk and prognostic factors for, 394
specifiers for, 393
delayed sleep phase type, 391–392
associated features supporting diagnosis 
of, 391
comorbidity with, 392
development and course of, 391
diagnostic features of, 391
diagnostic markers for, 392
differential diagnosis of, 392
functional consequences of, 392
prevalence of, 391
risk and prognostic factors for, 392
diagnostic criteria for, 390–391
irregular sleep-wake type, 394–396
associated features supporting diagnosis 
of, 395
comorbidity with, 396
development and course of, 395
diagnostic features of, 394–395
diagnostic markers for, 395
differential diagnosis of, 395
functional consequences of, 395
prevalence of, 395
risk and prognostic factors for, 395
non-24-hour sleep-wake type, 396–397
associated features supporting diagnosis 
of, 396
comorbidity with, 397
development and course of, 396
diagnostic features of, 396
diagnostic markers for, 397
differential diagnosis of, 397
functional consequences of, 397
prevalence of, 396
risk and prognostic factors for, 396–397
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 398
shift work type, 397–398
comorbidity with, 398
development and course of, 398
diagnostic features of, 397
diagnostic markers for, 398
differential diagnosis of, 398
functional consequences of, 398
prevalence of, 397
risk and prognostic factors for, 398
Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis 
Symptom Severity, 742–744Coding and reporting procedures, 12, 16, 22, 23, 
29
Cognitive disorders. See Neurocognitive disorders
Communication disorders, 31, 41–49
childhood-onset fluency disorder (stuttering), 
45–47
language disorder, 42–44
social (pragmatic) communication disorder, 
47–49
speech sound disorder, 44–45
unspecified communication disorder, 49
Comorbidity, 5
Compulsions, 235–236, 239. See also  Obsessive-
compulsive and related disorders
Conditions for further study, 7, 11, 24, 783–806
attenuated psychosis syndrome, 783–786
caffeine use disorder, 792–795
depressive episodes with short-duration 
hypomania, 786–789
Internet gaming disorder, 795–798
neurobehavioral disorder associated with 
prenatal alcohol exposure, 798–801
nonsuicidal self-injury, 803–805
persistent complex bereavement disorder, 
789–792
suicidal behavior disorder, 801–803
Conduct disorder, 32, 461, 469–475
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
472–473
comorbidity with, 475
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 474
development and course of, 473
diagnostic criteria for, 469–471
diagnostic features of, 472
differential diagnosis of, 474–475
functional consequences of, 474
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 474
prevalence of, 473
risk and prognostic factors for, 473–474
specifiers for, 471–472
subtypes of, 471
Conversion disorder (functional neurological 
symptom disorder), 309, 310, 318–321
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
319–320
comorbidity with, 321
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 320
development and course of, 320
diagnostic criteria for, 318–319
diagnostic features of, 319
differential diagnosis of, 321
functional consequences of, 321
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 320
prevalence of, 320
risk and prognostic factors for, 320
Index 923
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. See Prion disease, 
major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to
Crime or interaction with the legal system, 
problems related to, 725
Criterion for clinical significance, 21
Cross-cutting symptom measures, 733–741
DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom 
Measure, 734–736, 738–741
DSM-5 Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom 
Measures, 734, 735, 736, 737
frequency of use of, 737
Cultural concepts of distress, 750, 758, 759, 833–837
Cultural explanations or perceived causes, 14, 758
Cultural formulation, 749–759
definitions related to, 749
diagnostic importance of, 758–759
outline for, 749–750
relationship to DSM-5 nosology, 758
Cultural Formulation Interview (CFI), 17, 24, 749, 
750–757
domains of assessment, 751
indications for, 751
Informant Version, 755–757
supplementary modules of, 751
Cultural idioms of distress, 14, 758
Cultural issues, 14–15, 749–759
in anxiety disorders
generalized anxiety disorder, 224
panic attacks, 216
panic disorder, 211–212
selective mutism, 196
separation anxiety disorder, 193
social anxiety disorder (social phobia), 
205–206
specific phobia, 201
in bipolar and related disorders
bipolar I disorder, 130
bipolar and related disorder due to another 
medical condition, 147
in depressive disorders
major depressive disorder, 166
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, 173
in disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct 
disorders
conduct disorder, 474
intermittent explosive disorder, 468
oppositional defiant disorder, 465
in dissociative disorders
depersonalization/derealization disorder, 
304
dissociative amnesia, 300
dissociative identity disorder, 295
in enuresis, 357
in feeding and eating disorders
anorexia nervosa, 342avoidant/restrictive f ood intake disorder, 
336
binge-eating disorder, 352
bulimia nervosa, 348
pica, 331
in fetishistic disorder, 701
in gender dysphoria, 457
in neurocognitive disorders, 609
due to Alzheimer’s disease, 613
in neurodevelopmental disorders
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, 
62
autism spectrum disorder, 57
developmental coordination disorder, 76
intellectual disabi lity (intellectual 
developmental disorder), 39
specific learning disorder, 72–73
stereotypic movement disorder, 79
tic disorders, 83
in obsessive-compulsive and related disorders
body dysmorphic disorder, 245
hoarding disorder, 250
obsessive-compulsive disorder, 240
trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder), 
253
in personality disorders, 648
antisocial personality disorder, 662
avoidant personality disorder, 674
borderline personality disorder, 665–666
dependent personality disorder, 677
histrionic personality disorder, 668
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, 
681
paranoid personality disorder, 651
schizoid personality disorder, 654
schizotypal personality disorder, 657
in schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic 
disorders
brief psychotic disorder, 95
delusional disorder, 93
schizoaffective disorder, 108–109
schizophrenia, 103
in sexual dysfunctions, 423
delayed ejaculation, 425
erectile disorder, 428
female orgasmic disorder, 432
female sexual interest/arousal disorder, 
435–436
genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder, 
439
male hypoactive sexual desire disorder, 
442
premature (early) ejaculation, 445
substance/medication-induced sexual 
dysfunction, 449
924 Index
Cultural issues (continued)
in sleep-wake disorders
central sleep apnea hypopnea, 381
circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, 
advanced sleep phase type, 394
narcolepsy, 376
nightmare disorder, 406
substance/medication-induced sleep 
disorder, 418
in somatic symptoms and related disorders
conversion disorder (functional 
neurological symptom disorder), 320
illness anxiety disorder, 317
psychological factors affecting other 
medical conditions, 323
somatic symptom disorder, 313
in substance-related and addictive disorders
alcohol intoxi cation, 498
alcohol use disorder, 495
caffeine withdrawal, 508
cannabis use disorder, 514
gambling disorder, 588
inhalant use disorder, 536
opioid use disorder, 544
other hallucinogen use disorder, 526
other (or unknown) substance use 
disorder, 580
other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, 
580
phencyclidine use disorder, 522
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use 
disorder, 554
stimulant use disorder, 565
tobacco use disorder, 574
in suicidal behavior disorder, 802
in trauma- and stressor-related disorders
acute stress disorder, 285
adjustment disorders, 288
posttraumatic stress disorder, 278
reactive attachment disorder, 267
Cultural syndromes, 14, 758
Culture-bound syndromes, 14, 758
Cyclothymic disorder, 123, 139–141
comorbidity with, 141
development and course of, 140–141
diagnostic criteria for, 139–140
diagnostic features of, 140
differential diagnosis of, 141
prevalence of, 140
risk and prognostic factors for, 141
Definition of a mental disorder, 20
Delayed ejaculation, 423, 424–426
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
424–425comorbidity with, 426
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 425
development and course of, 425
diagnostic criteria for, 424
diagnostic features of, 424
differential diagnosis of, 425–426
functional consequences of, 425
prevalence of, 425
risk and prognostic factors for, 425
Delirium, 591, 596–602
due to another medical condition, 597
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 600
development and course of, 600–601
diagnostic criteria for, 596–598
diagnostic features of, 599–600
diagnostic markers for, 601
differential diagnosis of, 601
functional consequences of, 601
medication-induced, 597, 599
due to multiple etiologies, 597
other specified, 602
prevalence of, 600
recording procedures for, 598–599
risk and prognostic factors for, 601
specifiers for, 599
substance intoxication, 596–597, 598
substance withdrawal, 597, 598–599
unspecified, 602
Delusional disorder, 89, 90–93
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 92
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 93
delusional symptoms in partner of individual 
with, 122
development and course of, 92–93
diagnostic criteria for, 90–91
diagnostic features of, 92
functional consequences of, 93
prevalence of, 92
subtypes of, 91–92
Delusions, 87, 89, 90–93
bizarre, 87, 91
of control, 87
erotomanic, 87, 90
grandiose, 87, 90
jealous, 90, 91
mixed type, 91
nihilistic, 87
nonbizarre, 87
persecutory, 87, 90–91
referential, 87
with significant overlapping mood episodes, 
122
somatic, 87, 90, 92
unspecified type, 91
Dementia, 591. See also  Neurocognitive disorders
Index 925
Dependent personality disorder, 645, 646, 675–678
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 677
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 677
development and course of, 677
diagnostic criteria for, 675
diagnostic features of, 675–677
differential diagnosis of, 677–678
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 677
prevalence of, 677
Depersonalization/derealization disorder, 291, 
302–306
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 303
comorbidity with, 306
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 304
development and course of, 303–304
diagnostic criteria for, 302
diagnostic features of, 302–303
differential diagnosis of, 305–306
functional consequences of, 304–305
prevalence of, 303
risk and prognostic factors for, 304
Depressive disorder du e to another medical 
condition, 155, 180–183
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 181
comorbidity with, 183
development and course of, 181–182
diagnostic criteria for, 180–181
diagnostic features of, 181
diagnostic markers for, 182
differential diagnosis of, 182–183
functional consequences of, 182
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 182
risk and prognostic factors for, 182
suicide risk in, 182
Depressive disorders, 155–188
depressive disorder due to another medical 
condition, 155, 180–183
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, 155, 
156–160
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
810–811
major depressive disorder, 155, 160–168
other specified depres sive disorder, 155, 
183–184
persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), 
155, 168–171
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, 155, 171–175
specifiers for, 184–188
substance/medication-induced depressive 
disorder, 155, 175–180
unspecified depressive disorder, 155, 184
Depressive episode or symptoms in bipolar and 
related disorders
bipolar I disorder, 125–126, 129
bipolar II disorder, 133–134, 135–136cyclothymic disorder, 139, 140
other specified bipolar and related disorder, 
148
Depressive episodes with short-duration 
hypomania, 786–789
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
788
comorbidity with, 789
diagnostic features of, 788
differential diagnosis of, 788–789
functional consequences of, 788
prevalence of, 788
proposed criteria for, 786–787
risk and prognostic factors for, 788
suicide risk in, 788
Developmental coordination disorder, 32, 74–77
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 75
comorbidity with, 76
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 76
development and course of, 75–76
diagnostic criteria for, 74
diagnostic features of, 74–75
differential diagnosis of, 76–77
functional consequences of, 76
prevalence of, 75
risk and prognostic factors for, 76
Dhat syndrome, 833–834
Diagnosis, 5–6
assessment and monitoring measures for, 
23–24, 733–748
categorical, 5, 8, 12, 13, 19, 20
clinical utility of, 20
coding and reporting procedures for, 12, 16, 
22, 23, 29
criterion for clinical significance, 21
culture and, 14–15, 749–759
definition of a mental disorder, 20
diagnostic criteria and descriptors, 21
dimensional approach to, 5, 8, 9, 12–13, 17
elements of, 21–24
in forensic settings, 25
of medication-induced movement disorders, 
20, 22, 29, 709–714
of other conditions that may be a focus of 
clinical attention, 20, 22, 29, 715–727
principal, 22–23
provisional, 23
Diagnostic criteria, 21, 29
case formulation and, 19
proposed criteria for conditions for further 
study, 11, 783
revisions of, 6–10
subtypes and specifiers for, 21–22
validators for, 5, 9, 11, 12, 20
Diagnostic spectra, 6, 9, 12
926 Index
Disinhibited social engagement disorder, 265, 
268–270
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
269
development and course of, 269–270
diagnostic criteria for, 268–269
diagnostic features of, 269
differential diagnosis of, 270
functional consequences of, 270
prevalence of, 269
risk and prognostic factors for, 270
Disorganized thinking (speech), 88
Disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct 
disorders, 461–480
antisocial personality disorder, 461, 476, 645, 
646, 659–663
conduct disorder, 461, 469–475
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
815
intermittent explosive disorder, 461, 466–469
kleptomania, 461, 478–479
oppositional defiant disorder, 461, 462–466
other specified disrupti ve, impulse-control, 
and conduct disorder, 461, 479
pyromania, 461, 476–477
unspecified disruptive, impulse-control, and 
conduct disorder, 480
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, 155, 
156–160
comorbidity with, 160
development and course of, 157
diagnostic criteria for, 156
diagnostic features of, 156–157
differential diagnosis of, 158–160
functional consequences of, 158
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 158
prevalence of, 157
risk and prognostic factors for, 157–158
suicide risk in, 158
Dissociative amnesia, 291, 298–302
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 299
comorbidity with, 302
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 300
development and course of, 299
diagnostic criteria for, 298
diagnostic features of, 298–299
differential diagnosis of, 300–302
functional consequences of, 300
prevalence of, 299
risk and prognostic factors for, 299–300
suicide risk in, 300
Dissociative disorders, 291–307
depersonalization/derealization disorder, 291, 
302–306
dissociative amnesia, 291, 298–302dissociative identity disorder, 291–298
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
812
other specified dissoc iative disorder, 292, 
306–307
unspecified dissociative disorder, 307
Dissociative identity disorder, 291–298
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
294
comorbidity with, 297–298
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 295
development and course of, 294
diagnostic criteria for, 292
diagnostic features of, 292–294
differential diagnosis of, 296–297
functional consequences of, 295–296
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 295
prevalence of, 294
risk and prognostic factors for, 294–295
suicide risk in, 295
Dissociative reactions to stressful events, acute, 
306–307
Dissociative stupor or coma, 292
Dissociative trance, 292, 307
Down syndrome, 38, 40, 44, 53
DSM, history of, 5, 6
DSM-5
cultural issues in, 14–15, 749–759
developmental and lifespan considerations in, 
13
forensic use of, 25
gender differences in, 15
glossary of technical terms in, 817–831
harmonization with ICD-11, 11–12
highlights of changes from DSM-IV to, 809–817
anxiety disorders, 811
bipolar and related disorders, 810
depressive disorders, 810–811
disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct 
disorders, 815
dissociative disorders, 812
elimination disorders, 813
feeding and eating disorders, 813
gender dysphoria, 814–815
neurodevelopmental disorders, 809–810
obsessive-compulsive and related 
disorders, 811–812
paraphilic disorders, 816
personality disorders, 816
schizophrenia spectrum and other 
psychotic disorders, 810
sexual dysfunctions, 814
sleep-wake disorders, 814
somatic symptom and related disorders, 
812–813
Index 927
substance-related and addictive disorders, 
815–816
trauma- and stressor-related disorders, 812
multiaxial system and, 16
online enhancements of, 17
organizational structure of, 10–11, 13
other specified and unspecified mental 
disorders in, 15–16, 19–20, 707–708
revision process for, 5, 6–10
expert review, 8–10
field trials, 7–8
proposals for revisions, 7
public and professional review, 8
use of, 19–24
assessment and monitoring tools, 23–24, 
733–748
case formulation, 19–20
coding and reporting procedures, 12, 16, 
22, 23, 29
definition of a mental disorder, 20–21
elements of a diagnosis, 21–24
DSM-5 Level 1 Cross-Cutting Symptom Measure, 
734–736
adult self-rated version, 734, 735, 738–739
parent/guardian-rated version, 734, 736, 
740–741
scoring and interpretation of, 734–736
DSM-5 Level 2 Cross-Cutting Symptom 
Measures, 734, 735, 736, 737
Dysthymia. See  Persistent depressive disorder 
(dysthymia)
Dystonia, medication-induced, 22
acute, 711
tardive, 712
Eating disorders. See Feeding and eating disorders
Economic problems, 724
Educational problems, 723
Ejaculation
delayed, 423, 424–426
premature (early), 423, 443–446
Elements of diagnosis, 21–24
Elimination disorders, 355–360
encopresis, 355, 357–359
enuresis, 355–357
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
813
other specified elimin ation disorder, 359
unspecified elimination disorder, 360
Encopresis, 355, 357–359
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 358
comorbidity with, 359
development and course of, 359
diagnostic criteria for, 357–358
diagnostic features of, 358diagnostic markers for, 359
differential diagnosis of, 359
prevalence of, 359
risk and prognostic factors for, 359
subtypes of, 358
Enuresis, 355–357
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 356
comorbidity with, 356
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 356
development and course of, 356
diagnostic criteria for, 355
diagnostic features of, 355–356
differential diagnosis of, 356
functional consequences of, 356
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 356
prevalence of, 356
risk and prognostic factors for, 356
subtypes of, 355
Erectile disorder, 423, 426–429
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 427
comorbidity with, 429
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 428
development and course of, 427–428
diagnostic criteria for, 426–427
diagnostic features of, 427
diagnostic markers for, 428
differential diagnosis of, 428–429
functional consequences of, 428
prevalence of, 427
risk and prognostic factors for, 428
Excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, 235, 236, 
254–257
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 255
comorbidity with, 257
development and course of, 255
diagnostic criteria for, 254
diagnostic features of, 254–255
diagnostic markers for, 255
differential diagnosis of, 256
functional consequences of, 256
prevalence of, 255
risk and prognostic factors for, 255
Exhibitionistic disorder, 685, 689–691
comorbidity with, 691
development and course of, 690
diagnostic criteria for, 689
diagnostic features of, 689–690
differential diagnosis of, 691
functional consequences of, 691
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 691
prevalence of, 690
risk and prognostic factors for, 690–691
specifiers for, 689
subtypes of, 689
Externalizing disorders, 13
928 Index
Factitious disorder, 309, 310, 324–326
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
325–326
development and course of, 326
diagnostic criteria for, 324–325
diagnostic features of, 325
differential diagnosis of, 326
imposed on another, 310, 325–325, 338
prevalence of, 326
recording procedures for, 325
Family upbringing, problems related to, 715–716
Feeding and eating disorders, 329–354
anorexia nervosa, 329, 338–345
avoidant/restrictive food  intake disorder, 329, 
334–338
binge-eating disorder, 329, 350–353
bulimia nervosa, 329, 345–350
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
813
other specified feeding or eating disorder, 
353–354
pica, 329–331
rumination disorder, 329, 332–333
unspecified feeding or eating disorder, 354
Female orgasmic disorder, 423, 429–432
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
430–431
comorbidity with, 432
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 432
development and course of, 431
diagnostic criteria for, 429–430
diagnostic features of, 430
diagnostic markers for, 432
differential diagnosis of, 432
functional consequences of, 432
prevalence of, 431
risk and prognostic factors for, 431–432
Female sexual interest/arousal disorder, 423, 
433–437
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
434–435
comorbidity with, 436–437
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 435–436
development and course of, 435
diagnostic criteria for, 433
diagnostic features of, 433–434
differential diagnosis of, 436
functional consequences of, 436
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 436
prevalence of, 435
risk and prognostic factors for, 435
Fetishistic disorder, 685, 700–702
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 701
comorbidity with, 702
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 701development and course of, 701
diagnostic criteria for, 700
diagnostic features of, 701
differential diagnosis of, 702
functional consequences of, 701–702
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 701
specifiers for, 701
Forensic settings, 25
Formal thought disorder, 88
Frontotemporal neurocognitive disorder, major or 
mild, 591, 603, 614–618
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
616
development and course of, 616
diagnostic criteria for, 614–615
diagnostic features of, 615–616
diagnostic markers for, 616–617
differential diagnosis of, 617–618
functional consequences of, 617
prevalence of, 616
risk and prognostic factors for, 616
Frotteuristic disorder, 685, 691–694
comorbidity with, 693–694
development and course of, 693
diagnostic criteria for, 691–692
diagnostic features of, 692
differential diagnosis of, 693
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 693
prevalence of, 692–693
risk and prognostic factors for, 693
specifiers for, 692
Functional neurological symptom disorder. See 
Conversion disorder
GAF (Global Assessment of  Functioning) scale, 16
Gambling disorder, 481, 585–589
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
587
comorbidity with, 589
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 588
development and course of, 587–588
diagnostic criteria for, 585–586
diagnostic features of, 586–587
differential diagnosis of, 589
functional consequences of, 589
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 588
prevalence of, 587
risk and prognostic factors for, 588
specifiers for, 586
Gender differences, 15
Gender dysphoria, 451–459
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
454
comorbidity with, 458–459
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 457
Index 929
development and course of, 454–456
in association with a disorder of sex 
development, 456
without a disorder of  sex development, 
455–456
diagnostic criteria for, 452–453
diagnostic features of, 453–454
diagnostic markers for, 457
differential diagnosis of, 458
functional consequences of, 457–458
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
814–815
other specified, 459
prevalence of, 454
risk and prognostic factors for, 456–457
specifiers for, 453
unspecified, 459
Generalized anxiety disorder, 190, 222–226
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 223
comorbidity with, 226
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 224
development and course of, 223–224
diagnostic criteria for, 222
diagnostic features of, 222–223
differential diagnosis of, 225–226
functional consequences of, 225
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 224–225
prevalence of, 223
risk and prognostic factors for, 224
Genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder, 423, 
437–440
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
438
comorbidity with, 440
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 439
development and course of, 439
diagnostic criteria for, 437
diagnostic features of, 437–438
differential diagnosis of, 440
functional consequences of, 439
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 439
prevalence of, 438
risk and prognostic factors for, 439
Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF) scale, 16
Global developmental delay, 31, 41
Glossary of technical terms, 817–831
Hair pulling. See Trichotillomania (hair-pulling 
disorder)
Hallucinations, 87–88
auditory, 87, 103, 116, 122
gustatory, 116
hypnagogic, 87
hypnopompic, 88
olfactory, 116, 118tactile, 116
visual, 102, 103, 104, 116, 118
Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder, 
531–532
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 531
comorbidity with, 532
development and course of, 532
diagnostic criteria for, 531
diagnostic features of, 531
differential diagnosis of, 532
functional consequences of, 532
prevalence of, 531
risk and prognostic factors for, 532
Hallucinogen-related disorders, 481, 520–533
diagnoses associated with, 482
hallucinogen persisting perception disorder, 
531–532
other hallucinogen-induced disorders, 
532–533
other hallucinogen intoxication, 529–530
other hallucinogen use disorder, 523–527
other phencyclidine-induced disorders, 532
phencyclidine intoxication, 527–529
phencyclidine use disorder, 520–523
unspecified hallucinogen-related disorder, 533
unspecified phencyclidine-related disorder, 533
Histrionic personality disorder, 645, 646, 667–669
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
668
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 668
diagnostic criteria for, 667
diagnostic features of, 667–668
differential diagnosis of, 669
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 668
prevalence of, 668
HIV infection, major or mild neurocognitive 
disorder due to, 591, 604, 632–634
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 633
comorbidity with, 634
development and course of, 633
diagnostic criteria for, 632
diagnostic features of, 632
diagnostic markers for, 634
differential diagnosis of, 634
functional consequences of, 634
prevalence of, 633
risk and prognostic factors for, 633
Hoarding disorder, 235, 236, 247–251
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 249
comorbidity with, 251
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 250
development and course of, 249
diagnostic criteria for, 247
diagnostic features of, 248–249
differential diagnosis of, 250–251
930 Index
Hoarding disorder (continued)
functional consequences of, 250
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 250
prevalence of, 249
risk and prognostic factors for, 249
specifiers for, 248
Housing problems, 723–724
Huntington’s disease, 81, 117, 181, 182
major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to, 
591, 604, 638–641
associated features supporting diagnosis 
of, 639
development and course of, 639–640
diagnostic criteria for, 638–639
diagnostic features of, 639
diagnostic markers for, 640
differential diagnosis of, 640–641
functional consequences of, 640
prevalence of, 639
risk and prognostic factors for, 640
Hypersomnolence disorder, 361, 368–372
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
370
comorbidity with, 372
development and course of, 370
diagnostic criteria for, 368–369
diagnostic features of, 369–370
diagnostic markers for, 371
differential diagnosis of, 371–372
functional consequences of, 371
other specified, 421
prevalence of, 370
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 372
risk and prognostic factors for, 370–371
unspecified, 421
Hypochondriasis, 310, 315–316, 318. See also  
Illness anxiety disorder
Hypomanic episode or symptoms in bipolar and 
related disorders
bipolar I disorder, 124–125, 129
bipolar II disorder, 132–133, 135–136
bipolar and related disorder due to another 
medical condition, 146
cyclothymic disorder, 139, 140
depressive episodes with short-duration 
hypomania, 786–789
other specified bipolar and related disorder, 
148
ICD. See International Classification of Diseases
ICF (International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health), 21, 734
ICSD-2. See International Classification of Sleep 
Disorders,  2nd EditionIdentity disturbance due to prolonged and intense 
coercive persuasion, 306
Illness anxiety disorder, 309, 310, 315–318
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 316
brief, 327
comorbidity with, 318
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 317
diagnostic criteria for, 315
diagnostic features of, 315–316
differential diagnosis of, 317–318
functional consequences of, 317
prevalence of, 316
risk and prognostic factors for, 316–317
without excessive health-related behaviors, 
327
Inhalant intoxication, 538–540
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
539
diagnostic criteria for, 538
diagnostic features of, 538
differential diagnosis of, 539–540
functional consequences of, 539
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 539
prevalence of, 539
Inhalant-related disorders, 481, 533–540
diagnoses associated with, 482
inhalant intoxication, 538–540
inhalant use disorder, 533–538
other inhalant-induced disorders, 540
unspecified inhalant-related disorder, 540
Inhalant use disorder, 533–538
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
535
comorbidity with, 538
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 536
development and course of, 536
diagnostic criteria for, 533–534
diagnostic features of, 535
diagnostic markers for, 536–537
differential diagnosis of, 537
functional consequences of, 537
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 536
prevalence of, 535–536
risk and prognostic factors for, 536
specifiers for, 535
Insomnia disorder, 361, 362–368
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
364
brief, 420
comorbid ity w ith, 368
development and course of, 365
diagnostic criteria for, 362–363
diagnostic features of, 363–364
diagnostic markers for, 366–367
differential diagnosis of, 367–368
Index 931
functional consequences of, 367
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 366
other specified, 420
prevalence of, 364–365
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 368
restricted to nonrestorative sleep, 420
risk and protective factors for, 366
unspecified, 420–421
Intellectual disability (intellectual developmental 
disorder), 31, 33–41
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 38
coding and reporting for, 33
comorbidity with, 40
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 39
development and course of, 38–39
diagnostic criteria for, 33
diagnostic features of, 37–38
diagnostic markers for, 39
differential diagnosis of, 39–40
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 39
global developmental delay, 31, 41
prevalence of, 38
relationship to other classifications, 40–41
risk and prognostic factors for, 39
specifiers for levels of severity of, 33, 34–36
unspecified intellectual disability, 41
Intermittent explosive disorder, 461, 466–469
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
467
comorbidity with, 469
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 468
development and course of, 467
diagnostic criteria for, 466
diagnostic features of, 466–467
differential diagnosis of, 468–469
functional consequences of, 468
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 468
prevalence of, 467
risk and prognostic factors for, 467–468
Internalizing disorders, 13
International Classification of Diseases (ICD), 21
revision process for ICD-11, 6, 10, 11–12
use of ICD-9-CM and ICD-10 codes, 12, 16, 22, 
23, 29
International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health (ICF), 21, 734
International Classification of Sleep Disorders,  2nd 
Edition (ICSD-2), relationship of DSM-5 to, 
361–362
circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, 398
hypersomnolence disorder, 372
insomnia disorder, 368
narcolepsy, 378
nightmare disorder, 407obstructive sleep ap nea hypopnea, 383
rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, 
410
restless legs syndrome, 413
sleep-related hypoventilation, 390
substance/medication-induced sleep disorder, 
420
Internet gaming disorder, 795–798
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
797
comorbidity with, 798
diagnostic features of, 796–797
differential diagnosis of, 797–798
functional consequences of, 797
prevalence of, 797
proposed criteria for, 795–796
risk and prognostic factors for, 797
subtypes of, 796
Intoxication, 481, 485–487
alcohol, 497–499
associated with use of multiple substances, 486
caffeine, 503–506
cannabis, 516–517
delirium due to, 598
development and course of, 487
duration of effects and, 486
inhalant, 538–540
laboratory findings associated with, 486–487
opioid, 546–547
other hallucinogen, 529–530
other (or unknown) substance, 581–582
phencyclidine, 527–529
recording procedures for, 487
related to route of administration and speed of 
substance effects, 486
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic, 556–557
stimulant, 567–569
Jealousy, obsessional, 264
Jikoshu-kyofu,  264
Khyâl cap,  211, 212, 233, 834
Kleptomania, 461, 478–479
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
478
comorbidity with, 478
development and course of, 478
diagnostic criteria for, 478
diagnostic features of, 478
differential diagnosis of, 478
functional consequences of, 478
prevalence of, 478
risk and prognostic factors for, 478
Koro,  264
Kufungisisa,  14, 834–835
932 Index
Language disorder, 31, 42–44
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 43
comorbidity with, 44
development and course of, 43
diagnostic criteria for, 42
diagnostic features of, 42
differential diagnosis of, 43
risk and prognostic factors for, 43
Learning disorder. See Specific learning disorder
Level of Personality Fu nctioning Scale (LPFS), 
772, 775–778
Lewy bodies, major or mild neurocognitive 
disorder with, 591, 603, 618–621
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 619
comorbidity with, 621
development and course of, 619–620
diagnostic criteria for, 618–619
diagnostic features of, 619
diagnostic markers for, 620
differential diagnosis of, 620
functional consequences of, 620
prevalence of, 619
risk and prognostic factors for, 620
LPFS (Level of Personality Functioning Scale), 
772, 775–778
Major depressive disorder, 155, 160–168
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
164–165
comorbidity with, 168
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 166
development and course of, 165–166
diagnostic criteria for, 160–162
diagnostic features of, 162–164
differential diagnosis of, 167–168
functional consequences of, 167
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 167
prevalence of, 165
risk and prognostic factors for, 166
suicide risk in, 164, 167
Major depressive episode in bipolar and related 
disorders
bipolar I disorder, 125–126, 129
bipolar II disorder, 133–134, 135–136
other specified bipolar and related disorder, 
148
Maladi moun, 14, 835
Male hypoactive sexual desire disorder, 423, 
440–443
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
441–442
comorbidity with, 443
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 442
development and course of, 442
diagnostic criteria for, 440–441diagnostic features of, 441
differential diagnosis of, 443
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 442–443
prevalence of, 442
risk and prognostic factors for, 442
Manic episode
in bipolar I disorder, 124, 127–129
in bipolar and related disorder due to another 
medical cond ition, 146
Medication-induced delirium, 597, 599
Medication-induced movement disorders and 
other adverse effects of medication, 20, 22, 
29, 709–714
antidepressant discontinuation syndrome, 22, 
712–714
medication-induced acute akathisia, 22, 711
medication-induced acute dystonia, 711
medication-induced postural tremor, 712
neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism, 709
neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 22, 709–711
other adverse effect of medication, 712–714
other medication-induced movement 
disorder, 712
other medication-induced parkinsonism, 709
tardive akathisia, 712
tardive dyskinesia, 22, 712
tardive dystonia, 712
Mental disorder(s)
culture and, 14–15, 749–759
definition of, 20
criterion for clinical significance, 21
in forensic settings, 25
gender and, 15
Motor disorders, neurodevelopmental, 32, 74–85
developmental coordination disorder, 74–77
stereotypic movement disorder, 77–80
tic disorders, 81–85
Movement disorders, medication-induced. See 
Medication-induced movement disorders 
and other adverse effects of medication
Muscle dysmorphia, 236, 243, 245
Narcissistic personality disorder, 645, 646, 
669–672
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
671
development and course of, 671
diagnostic criteria for, 669–670
diagnostic features of, 670–671
differential diagnosis of, 671–672
features and criteria in alternative DSM-5 
model for personality disorders, 763, 
767–768
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 671
prevalence of, 671
Index 933
Narcolepsy, 361, 372–378
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
374–375
comorbidity with, 377–378
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 376
development and course of, 375
diagnostic criteria for, 372–373
diagnostic features of, 374
diagnostic markers for, 376
differential diagnosis of, 376–377
functional consequences of, 376
prevalence of, 375
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 378
risk and prognostic factors for, 375–376
subtypes of, 373–374
NCDs. See Neurocognitive disorders
Neglect
child, 718–719
spouse or partner, 721
Nervios,  835
Neurobehavioral disorder associated with 
prenatal alcohol exposure, 798–801
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 799
comorbidity with, 800–801
development and course of, 800
diagnostic features of, 799
differential diagnosis of, 800
functional consequences of, 800
prevalence of, 800
proposed criteria for, 798–799
suicide risk in, 800
Neurocognitive disorders (NCDs), 591–643
delirium, 591, 596–602
other specified delirium, 602
unspecified delirium, 602
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
816
major and mild neurocognitive disorders, 591, 
602–611, 611–643
associated features supporting diagnosis 
of, 608
comorbidity with, 610–611
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 609
development and course of, 608–609
diagnostic criteria for, 602–606
diagnostic features of, 607–608
diagnostic markers for, 609–610
differential diagnosis of, 610
functional consequences of, 610
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 609
prevalence of, 608
risk and prognostic factors for, 609
specifiers for, 606–607
subtypes of, 591, 603–604,  606, 611–643major or mild frontotemporal neuro-
cognitive disorder, 591, 603, 614–618
major or mild neurocognitive disorder 
due to Alzheimer’s disease, 591, 603, 
611–614
major or mild neurocognitive disorder 
due to another medical condition, 
591, 604, 641–642
major or mild neurocognitive disorder 
due to HIV infection, 591, 604, 632–
634
major or mild neurocognitive disorder 
due to Huntington’s disease, 591, 
604, 638–641
major or mild neurocognitive disorder 
with Lewy bodies, 591, 603, 618–621
major or mild neurocognitive disorder 
due to multiple etiologies, 591, 604, 
642–643
major or mild neurocognitive disorder 
due to Parkinson’s disease, 591, 604, 
636–638
major or mild neurocognitive disorder 
due to prion disease, 591, 604,  634–
636
major or mild neurocognitive disorder 
due to traumatic brain injury, 591, 
603, 624–627, 626
major or mild substance/medication-
induced neurocognitive disorder, 
591, 603, 627–632
unspecified neurocognitive disorder, 
591, 604, 643
vascular neurocogniti ve disorder, 591, 
603, 621–624
neurocognitive domains, 592, 593–595
Neurodevelopmental disorders, 11, 13, 31–86
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, 11, 
32, 59–66
autism spectrum disorders, 31–32, 50–59
communication disorders, 31, 41–49
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
809–810
intellectual disabilities, 31, 33–41
motor disorders, 32, 74–85
other specified neurodevelopmental disorder, 
86
specific learning disorder, 32, 66–74
specifiers for, 32–33
tic disorders, 32, 81–85
unspecified neurodevelopmental disorder, 86
Neurodevelopmental motor disorders, 32, 74–85
developmental coordination disorder, 74–77
stereotypic movement disorder, 77–80
tic disorders, 81–85
934 Index
Neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism, 709
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 22, 709–711
development and course of, 710
diagnostic features of, 710
differential diagnosis of, 711
risk and prognostic factors for, 711
Night eating syndrome, 354
Nightmare disorder, 361, 404–407
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 405
comorbidity with, 407
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 406
development and course of, 405
diagnostic criteria for, 404
diagnostic features of, 404–405
diagnostic markers for, 406
differential diagnosis of, 406–407
functional consequences of, 406
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 406
prevalence of, 405
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 407
risk and prognostic factors for, 405
Nonadherence to medical treatment, 22, 726–727
Non–rapid eye movement sleep arousal 
disorders, 361, 399–404
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
400–401
comorbidity with, 403
development and course of, 401
diagnostic criteria for, 399
diagnostic features of, 400
diagnostic markers for, 402
differential diagnosis of, 402–403
functional consequences of, 402
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 401
prevalence of, 401
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 404
risk and prognostic factors for, 401
Nonsuicidal self-injury, 803–805
development and course of, 804
diagnostic features of, 804
differential diagnosis of, 805–806
functional consequences of, 805
proposed criteria for, 803
risk and prognostic factors for, 804
Obesity, 22
feeding and eating disorders and, 329, 344, 
348, 351–353
sleep-wake disorders and, 413
hypersomnia, 372, 373, 375, 376, 377
obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, 
379–380, 382
sleep-related hypoventilation, 387–388, 389Obsessional jealousy, 264
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 235–236, 
237–242
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
238–239
comorbidity with, 243
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 240
development and course of, 239
diagnostic criteria for, 237
diagnostic features of, 238
differential diagnosis of, 242–243
functional consequences of, 241–242
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 239, 240
prevalence of, 239
risk and prognostic factors for, 239–240
specifiers for, 236, 238
suicide risk in, 240
Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, 645, 
646, 678–682
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
680–681
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 681
diagnostic criteria for, 678–679
diagnostic features of, 679–680
differential diagnosis of, 681–682
features and criteria in alternative DSM-5 
model for personality disorders, 764, 
768–769
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 681
prevalence of, 681
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorder due to 
another medical condition, 235, 236, 260–263
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
262
development and course of, 262
diagnostic criteria for, 260–261
diagnostic features of, 261–262
diagnostic markers for, 262
differential diagnosis of, 262–263
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, 
235–264
body dysmorphic disorder, 235, 236, 242–247
excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, 235, 236, 
254–257
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
811–812
hoarding disorder, 235, 236, 247–251
obsessions and compulsions in, 235–236, 239
obsessive-compulsive disorder, 235–236, 
237–242
obsessive-compulsive and related disorder 
due to another medical condition, 
235.236, 260–263
other specified obsess ive-compulsive and 
related disorder, 235, 236, 263–264
Index 935
substance/medication-induced obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder, 235, 
236, 257–260
trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder), 235, 
236, 251–254
unspecified obsessive-compulsive and related 
disorder, 235, 236
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, 378–383
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
379
comorbidity with, 383
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 381
development and course of, 379–380
diagnostic criteria for, 378
diagnostic features of, 379
diagnostic markers for, 381
differential diagnosis of, 381–383
functional consequences of, 381
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 381
prevalence of, 379
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 383
risk and prognostic factors for, 380–381
specifiers for, 378–379
Occupational problems, 723
OCD. See Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Olfactory reference syndrome, 246, 264, 837
Online enhancements, 17
Opioid intoxication, 546–547
diagnostic criteria for, 546–547
diagnostic features of, 547
differential diagnosis of, 547
specifiers for, 547
Opioid-related disorders, 481, 540–550
diagnoses associated with, 482
opioid intoxication, 546–547
opioid use disorder, 541–546
opioid withdrawal, 484, 547–549
other opioid-induced disorders, 549
unspecified opioid-related disorder, 550
Opioid use disorder, 541–546
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 543
comorbidity with, 546
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 544
development and course of, 543
diagnostic criteria for, 541–542
diagnostic features of, 542
diagnostic markers for, 544
differential diagnosis of, 545–546
functional consequences of, 544–545
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 544
prevalence of, 543
risk and prognostic factors for, 543–544
specifiers for, 542
suicide risk in, 544Opioid withdrawal, 484, 547–549
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 549
development and course of, 549
diagnostic criteria for, 547–548
diagnostic features of, 548
differential diagnosis of, 549
prevalence of, 549
Oppositional defiant disorder, 32, 461, 462–466
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
464
comorbidity with, 466
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 465
development and course of, 464
diagnostic criteria for, 462–463
diagnostic features of, 463
differential diagnosis of, 465
functional consequences of, 465
prevalence of, 464
risk and prognostic factors for, 464
specifiers for, 463
Other circumstances of personal history, 726
Other conditions that may be a focus of clinical 
attention, 20, 22, 29, 715–727
abuse and neglect, 717–722
adult maltreatment and neglect problems, 
720–722
child maltreatment and neglect problems, 
717–719
educational and occupational problems, 723
housing and economic problems, 723–724
nonadherence to medical treatment, 726–727
other circumstances of personal history, 726
other health service encounters for counseling 
and medical advice, 725
other problems related to the social 
environment, 724–725
problems related to access to medical and 
other health care, 726
problems related to crime or interaction with 
the legal system, 725
problems related to other psychosocial, 
personal, and environmental 
circumstances, 725
relational problems, 715–717
other problems relate d to primary support 
group, 716–717
problems related to family upbringing, 
715–716
Other hallucinogen intoxication, 529–530
diagnostic criteria for, 529
diagnostic features of, 529
differential diagnosis of, 530
functional consequences of, 530
prevalence of, 530
suicide risk in, 530
936 Index
Other hallucinogen use disorder, 523–527
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
525
comorbidity with, 527
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 526
development and course of, 525–526
diagnostic criteria for, 523–524
diagnostic features of, 524–525
diagnostic markers for, 526
differential diagnosis of, 527
functional consequences of, 527
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 526
prevalence of, 525
risk and prognostic factors for, 526
specifiers for, 524
Other health service encounters for counseling 
and medical advice, 725
Other mental disorders, 707–708
other specified mental disorder, 15–16, 19, 
708
other specified mental di sorder due to another 
medical condition, 707
unspecified mental disorder, 15–16, 19–20, 708
unspecified mental disorder due to another 
medical condition, 708
Other problems related to primary support group, 
716–717
Other problems related to social environment, 
724–725
Other psychosocial, personal, and environmental 
circumstances,  problems related to, 725
Other specified mental disorder, 15–16, 19, 708
due to another medical condition, 707
Other (or unknown) substance intoxication, 
581–582
comorbidity with, 582
development and course of, 581–582
diagnostic criteria for, 581
diagnostic features of, 581
differential diagnosis of, 582
functional consequences of, 582
prevalence of, 581
Other (or unknown) substance–related disorders, 
577–585
diagnoses associated with, 482
other (or unknown) substance–induced 
disorders, 584–585
other (or unknown) substance intoxication, 
581–582
other (or unknown) substance use disorder, 
577–580
other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, 
583–584
unspecified other (or unknown) substance–
related disorder, 585Other (or unknown) substance use disorder, 
577–580
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 579
comorbidity with, 580
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 580
development and course of, 580
diagnostic criteria for, 577–578
diagnostic features of, 579
diagnostic markers for, 580
differential diagnosis of, 580
prevalence of, 579
risk and prognostic factors for, 580
specifiers for, 578
Other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, 
583–584
comorbidity with, 584
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 583
development and course of, 583
diagnostic criteria for, 583
diagnostic features of, 583
differential diagnosis of, 584
functional consequences of, 584
prevalence of, 583
Panic attacks, 189, 190, 208–209, 214–217
associated features with, 215
comorbidity with, 217
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 216
development and course of, 215–216
diagnostic markers for, 216
differential diagnosis of, 217
expected vs. unexpected, 215
features of, 214–215
functional consequences of, 217
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 216
nocturnal, 209, 215
in older adults, 210–211, 215–216
prevalence of, 215
risk and prognostic factors for, 216
specifier for, 214–217
suicide risk and, 215
symptoms of, 214
Panic disorder, 190, 208–214
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 210
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 211–212
development and course of, 210–211
diagnostic criteria for, 208–209
diagnostic features of, 209
diagnostic markers for, 212
differential diagnosis of, 212–213
functional consequences of, 212
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 210.212
prevalence of, 210
risk and prognostic factors for, 211
suicide risk in, 212
Index 937
Paranoid personality disorder, 645, 646, 649–652
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
650–651
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 651
development and course of, 651
diagnostic criteria for, 649
diagnostic features of, 649–650
differential diagnosis of, 652
prevalence of, 651
risk and prognostic factors for, 651
Paraphilic disorders, 685–705
exhibitionistic disorder, 685, 689–691
fetishistic disorder, 685, 700–702
frotteuristic disorder, 685, 691–694
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
816
other specified para philic disorder, 705
pedophilic disorder, 685, 697–700
sexual masochism disorder, 685, 694–695
sexual sadism disorder, 685, 695–697
transvestic disorder, 685, 702–704
unspecified paraphilic disorder, 705
voyeuristic disorder, 685, 686–688
Parasomnias, 361, 399–410
nightmare disorder, 361, 404–407
non–rapid eye movement sleep arousal 
disorders, 361, 399–404
rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, 
361, 407–410
Parkinsonism
neuroleptic-induced, 709
other medication-induced, 709
Parkinson’s disease
anxiety disorders and, 203, 205, 207, 218, 221
depressive disorders and, 181, 182
major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to, 
591, 604, 636–638
associated features supporting diagnosis 
of, 637
comorbidity with, 638
development and course of, 637
diagnostic criteria for, 636–637
diagnostic features of, 637
diagnostic markers for, 637–638
differential diagnosis of, 638
prevalence of, 637
risk and prognostic factors for, 637
sleep-wake disorders and,  372, 383, 395, 413, 
421
REM sleep behavior disorder, 361, 408, 410
Pedophilic disorder, 685, 697–700
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 698
comorbidity with, 700
development and course of, 699
diagnostic criteria for, 697–698diagnostic features of, 698
diagnostic markers for, 699
differential diagnosis of, 700
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 699
prevalence of, 698
risk and prognostic factors for, 699
Persistent complex bereavement disorder, 289, 
789–792
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
791
comorbidity with, 792
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 791
development and course of, 791
diagnostic features of, 790–791
differential diagnosis of, 792
functional consequences of, 792
prevalence of, 791
proposed criteria for, 789–790
risk and prognostic factors for, 791
suicide risk in, 791
Persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia), 155, 
168–171
comorbidity with, 171
development and course of, 170
diagnostic criteria for, 168–169
diagnostic features of, 169–170
differential diagnosis of, 170–171
functional consequences of, 170
prevalence of, 170
risk and prognostic factors for, 170
Personality change due to another medical 
condition, 645, 682–684
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
683
diagnostic criteria for, 682
diagnostic features of, 683
differential diagnosis of, 683–684
subtypes of, 683
Personality disorders, 645–684
Cluster A, 646, 649–659
paranoid personality disorder, 645, 646, 
649–652
schizoid personality disorder, 645, 646, 
652–655
schizotypal personality disorder, 87, 89, 90, 
645, 646, 655–659
Cluster B, 646, 659–672
antisocial personality disorder, 461, 476, 
645, 646, 659–663
borderline personality disorder, 645, 646, 
663–666
histrionic personality disorder, 645, 646, 
667–669
narcissistic personality disorder, 645, 646, 
669–672
938 Index
Personality disorders (continued)
Cluster C, 646, 672–682
avoidant personality disorder, 645, 646, 
672–675
dependent personality disorder, 645, 646, 
675–678
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, 
645, 646, 678–682
general personality disorder, 646–649
criteria for, 646–647
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 648
development and course of, 647–648
diagnostic features of, 647
differential diagnosis of, 648–649
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 648
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
816
other specified personality disorder, 645–646, 
684
personality change due to another medical 
condition, 645, 682–684
unspecified personality disorder, 645–646, 684
Personality disorders: alternative DSM-5 model, 
761–781
diagnosis of, 771
general criteria for personality disorder, 
761–763
Criterion A: level of personality 
functioning, 762, 762
Criterion B: pathological personality traits, 
762–763
Criteria C and D: pervasiveness and 
stability, 763
Criteria E, F, and G: alternative 
explanations for personality 
pathology, 763
level of personality functioning, 762, 762, 
771–772
Level of Personality Functioning Scale for 
rating of, 772, 775–778
self- and interpersonal  functioning 
dimensional definition, 772
personality traits, 772–774
assessment of Personality Trait Model, 774
clinical utility of  multidimensional 
personality functioning and trait 
model, 774
definition and description of, 772–773
definitions of personality disorder trait 
domains and facets, 779–781
dimensionality of, 772–773
distinguishing traits, symptoms, and 
specific behaviors, 773–774
hierarchical structure of personality, 773
Personality Trait Model, 773scoring algorithms for, 771
specific personality disorders, 763–771
antisocial personality disorder, 763, 764–765
avoidant personality disorder, 763, 765–766
borderline personality disorder, 763, 766–
767
narcissistic personality disorder, 763, 
767–768
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, 
764, 768–769
personality disorder—trait specified, 761, 
770–771
schizotypal personality disorder, 764, 
769–770
Phencyclidine intoxication, 527–529
diagnostic criteria for, 527–528
diagnostic features of, 528
diagnostic markers for, 528
differential diagnosis of, 528–529
functional consequences of, 528
prevalence of, 528
Phencyclidine-related disorders, 481
diagnoses associated with, 482
other phencyclidine-induced disorders, 532
phencyclidine intoxication, 527–529
phencyclidine use disorder, 520–523
unspecified phencyclidine-related disorder, 533
Phencyclidine use disorder, 520–523
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 522
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 522
diagnostic criteria for, 520–521
diagnostic features of, 521–522
diagnostic markers for, 522
differential diagnosis of, 523
functional consequences of, 522
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 522
prevalence of, 522
risk and prognostic factors for, 522
specifiers for, 521
Phobic disorders
agoraphobia, 190, 217–221
social anxiety disorder (social phobia), 190, 
202–208
specific phobia, 189–190, 197–202
Physical abuse
child, 717–718
nonspouse or nonpartner, 722
spouse or partner, 720
Pica, 329–331
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
330
comorbidity with, 331
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 331
development and course of, 330
diagnostic criteria for, 329–330
Index 939
diagnostic features of, 330
diagnostic markers for, 331
differential diagnosis of, 331
functional consequences of, 331
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 331
prevalence of, 330
risk and prognostic factors for, 330
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 265, 271–280
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
276
comorbidity with, 280
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 278
development and course of, 276–277
diagnostic criteria for, 271–274
diagnostic features of, 274–276
differential diagnosis of, 279–280
functional consequences of, 278–279
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 278
prevalence of, 276
risk and prognostic factors for, 277–278
suicide risk in, 278
Postural tremor, medication-induced, 712
Premature (early) ejaculation, 423, 443–446
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
444
comorbidity with, 446
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 445
development and course of, 444–445
diagnostic criteria for, 443–444
diagnostic features of, 444
diagnostic markers for, 445
differential diagnosis of, 445–446
functional consequences of, 445
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 445
prevalence of, 444
risk and prognostic factors for, 445
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder, 155, 171–175
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 173
comorbidity with, 175
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 173
development and course of, 173
diagnostic criteria for, 171–172
diagnostic features of, 172–173
diagnostic markers for, 173–174
differential diagnosis of, 174–175
functional consequences of, 174
prevalence of, 173
recording procedures for, 172
risk and prognostic factors for, 173
Principal diagnosis, 22–23
Prion disease, major or mild neurocognitive 
disorder due to, 591, 604, 634–636
development and course of, 635
diagnostic criteria for, 634–635
diagnostic features of, 635diagnostic markers for, 636
differential diagnosis of, 636
prevalence of, 635
risk and prognostic factors for, 636
Problems related to access to medical and other 
health care, 726
Problems related to crime or interaction with the 
legal system, 725
Problems related to family upbringing, 715–716
Problems related to other psychosocial, personal, 
and environmental circumstances, 725
Provisional diagnosis, 23
Pseudocyesis, 310, 327
Psychological abuse
child, 719
nonspouse or nonpartner, 722
spouse or partner abuse, 721–722
Psychological factors af fecting other medical 
conditions, 309, 310, 322–324
comorbidity with, 324
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 323
development and course of, 323
diagnostic criteria for, 322
diagnostic features of, 322–323
differential diagnosis of, 323–324
functional consequences of, 323
prevalence of, 323
Psychotic disorder due to another medical 
condition, 89, 115–118
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 116
comorbidity with, 118
development and course of, 117
diagnostic criteria for, 115–116
diagnostic features of, 116
diagnostic markers for, 117
differential diagnosis of, 118
functional consequences of, 118
prevalence of, 116–117
risk and prognostic factors for, 117
specifiers for, 116
suicide risk in, 118
Psychotic disorders. See Schizophrenia spectrum 
and other psychotic disorders
PTSD. See Posttraumatic stress disorder
Purging disorder, 353
Pyromania, 461, 476–477
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
476–477
comorbidity with, 477
development and course of, 477
diagnostic criteria for, 476
diagnostic features of, 476
differential diagnosis of, 477
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 477
prevalence of, 477
940 Index
Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior 
disorder, 361, 407–410
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 408
comorbidity with, 410
development and course of, 408–409
diagnostic criteria for, 407–408
diagnostic features of, 408
diagnostic markers for, 409
differential diagnosis of, 409–410
functional consequences of, 409
prevalence of, 408
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 410
risk and prognostic factors for, 409
Reactive attachment disorder, 265–268
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 266
comorbidity with, 268
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 267
development and course of, 266
diagnostic criteria for, 265–266
diagnostic features of, 266
differential diagnosis of, 267–268
functional consequences of, 267
prevalence of, 266
risk and prognostic factors for, 267
Recurrent brief depression, 183
Relational problems, 22, 715–717
other problems relate d to primary support 
group, 716–717
problems related to family upbringing, 715–716
REM sleep behavior disorder. See Rapid eye 
movement sleep behavior disorder
Restless legs syndrome (RLS), 361, 410–413
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
411
comorbidity with, 413
development and course of, 411–412
diagnostic criteria for, 410
diagnostic features of, 411
diagnostic markers for, 412
differential diagnosis of, 413
functional consequences of, 412–413
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 412
prevalence of, 411
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 413
risk and prognostic factors for, 412
Rett syndrome, 33, 38, 51, 53, 56, 57, 79, 80
RLS. See Restless legs syndrome
Rumination disorder, 329, 332–333
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
332–333
comorbidity with, 333
development and course of, 333
diagnostic criteria for, 332diagnostic features of, 332
differential diagnosis of, 333
functional consequences of, 333
prevalence of, 333
risk and prognostic factors for, 333
Schizoaffective disorder, 89–90, 105–110
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 107
comorbidity with, 110
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 108–109
development and course of, 108
diagnostic criteria for, 105–106
diagnostic features of, 106–107
differential diagnosis of, 109–110
functional consequences of, 109
prevalence of, 107–108
risk and prognostic factors for, 108
suicide risk in, 109
Schizoid personality disorder, 645, 646, 652–655
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
653–654
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 654
development and course of, 654
diagnostic criteria for, 652–653
diagnostic features of, 653
differential diagnosis of, 654–655
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 654
prevalence of, 654
risk and prognostic factors for, 654
Schizophrenia, 87, 99–105
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
101–102
with catatonia, 88, 100
comorbidity with, 105
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 103
development and course of, 102–103
diagnostic features of, 87–88, 100–101
differential diagnosis of, 104–105
functional consequences of, 104
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 103–104
prevalence of, 102
risk and prognostic factors for, 103
suicide risk in, 104
Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic 
disorders, 87–122
brief psychotic disorder, 89, 94–96
catatonia, 88, 89, 119–121
clinician-rated assessment of symptoms and 
related clinical phenomena in, 89–90
delusional disorder, 89, 90–93
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
810
key features of, 87–88
delusions, 87
disorganized thinking (speech), 88
Index 941
grossly disorganized or abnormal motor 
behavior (including catatonia), 88
hallucinations, 87–88
negative symptoms, 88
other specified schizo phrenia spectrum and 
other psychotic disorder, 122
psychotic disorder due to another medical 
condition, 89, 115–118
schizoaffective disorder, 89–90, 105–110
schizophrenia, 87, 99–105
schizophreniform disorder, 89, 96–99
schizotypal (personality) disorder, 87, 89, 90
substance/medication-induced psychotic 
disorder, 89, 110–115
unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other 
psychotic disorder, 122
Schizophreniform disorder, 89, 96–99
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 98
development and course of, 98
diagnostic criteria for, 96–97
diagnostic features of, 97–98
differential diagnosis of, 98–99
functional consequences of, 98
prevalence of, 98
provisional diagnosis of, 97
risk and prognostic factors for, 98
Schizotypal personality disorder, 87, 89, 90, 645, 
646, 655–659
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
657
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 657
development and course of, 657
diagnostic criteria for, 655–656
diagnostic features of, 656–657
differential diagnosis of, 658–659
features and criteria in alternative DSM-5 
model for personality disorders, 764, 
769–770
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 658
prevalence of, 657
risk and prognostic factors for, 657
Sedative, hypnotic, or an xiolytic intoxication, 
556–557
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 557
diagnostic criteria for, 556
diagnostic features of, 556–557
differential diagnosis of, 557
prevalence of, 557
Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related 
disorders, 481, 550–560
diagnoses associated with, 482
other sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-
induced disorders, 560
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication, 
556–557sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, 
550–556
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal, 
484, 557–560
unspecified sedative-, hy pnotic-, or anxiolytic-
related disorder, 560
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, 
550–556
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
553
comorbidity with, 555–556
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 554
development and course of, 553–554
diagnostic criteria for, 550–552
diagnostic features of, 552–553
diagnostic markers for, 554–555
differential diagnosis of, 555
functional consequences of, 555
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 554
prevalence of, 553
risk and prognostic factors for, 554
specifiers for, 552
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal, 484, 
557–560
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 559
diagnostic criteria for, 557–558
diagnostic features of, 558
diagnostic markers for, 559
differential diagnosis of, 559–560
prevalence of, 559
Selective mutism, 189, 195–197
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
195–196
comorbidity with, 197
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 196
development and course of, 196
diagnostic criteria for, 195
diagnostic features of, 195
differential diagnosis of, 197
functional consequences of, 196–197
prevalence of, 196
risk and prognostic factors for, 196
Separation anxiety disorder, 189, 190–195
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 192
comorbidity with, 195
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 193
development and course of, 192–193
diagnostic criteria for, 190–191
diagnostic features of, 191–192
differential diagnosis of, 194–195
functional consequences of, 193–194
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 193
prevalence of, 192
risk and prognostic factors for, 193
suicide risk in, 193
942 Index
Severity measures, 733, 742
Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis 
Symptom Severity, 742–744
frequency of use of, 742
scoring and interpretation of, 742
Sexual abuse
child, 718
nonspouse or nonpartner, 722
spouse or partner, 720
Sexual dysfunctions, 423–450
delayed ejaculation, 423, 424–426
erectile disorder, 423, 426–429
female orgasmic disorder, 423, 429–432
female sexual interest/arousal disorder, 423, 
433–437
genito-pelvic pain/penetration disorder, 423, 
437–440
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
814
male hypoactive sexual desire disorder, 423, 
440–443
other specified sexual dysfunction, 423, 450
premature (early) ejaculation, 423, 443–446
substance/medication-induced sexual 
dysfunction, 423, 446–450
subtypes of, 423
unspecified sexual dysfunction, 423, 450
Sexual masochism disorder, 685, 694–695
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 694
comorbidity with, 695
development and course of, 695
diagnostic criteria for, 694
diagnostic features of, 694
differential diagnosis of, 695
functional consequences of, 695
prevalence of, 694
Sexual sadism disorder, 685, 695–697
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 696
comorbidity with, 697
development and course of, 697
diagnostic criteria for, 695
diagnostic features of, 696
differential diagnosis of, 697
prevalence of, 696
Shenjing shuairuo,  835–836
Shubo-kyofu,  264
Skin picking. See Excoriation (skin-picking) 
disorder
Sleep-related hypoventilation, 387–390
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
387–388
comorbidity with, 389–390
development and course of, 388
diagnostic criteria for, 387
diagnostic features, 387diagnostic markers for, 389
differential diagnosis of, 389
functional consequences of, 389
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 389
prevalence of, 388
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 390
risk and prognostic factors for, 388
subtypes of, 387
Sleep terrors, 399–403. See also  Non–rapid eye 
movement sleep arousal disorders
Sleep-wake disorders, 361–422
breathing-related sleep disorders, 361, 378–390
central sleep apnea, 383–386
obstructive sleep ap nea hypopnea, 378–383
sleep-related hypoventilation, 387–390
circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, 361, 
390–398
advanced sleep phase type, 393–394
delayed sleep phase type, 391–392
irregular sleep-wake type, 394–396
non-24-hour sleep-wake type, 396–397
shift work type, 397–398
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
814
hypersomnolence disorder, 361, 368–372
other specified, 421
unspecified, 421
insomnia disorder, 361, 362–368
other specified, 420
unspecified, 420–421
narcolepsy, 361, 372–378
other specified sleep-wake disorder, 421
parasomnias, 399–410
nightmare disorder, 361, 404–407
non–rapid eye movement sleep arousal 
disorders, 361, 399–404
rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
disorder, 361, 407–410
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 361–362 ( See also  specific 
sleep-wake disorders )
restless legs syndrome, 361, 410–413
substance/medication-induced sleep disorder, 
413–420
unspecified sleep-wake disorder, 422
Sleepwalking, 399–403. See also  Non–rapid eye 
movement sleep arousal disorders
Smoking. See Tobacco-related disorders
Social anxiety disorder (social phobia), 190, 
202–208
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
204
comorbidity with, 208
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 205–206
Index 943
development and course of, 205
diagnostic criteria for, 202–203
diagnostic features of, 203–204
differential diagnosis of, 206–207
functional consequences of, 206
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 204, 206
prevalence of, 204
risk and prognostic factors for, 205
specifiers for, 203
Social (pragmatic) communication disorder, 31, 
47–49
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 48
development and course of, 48
diagnostic criteria for, 47–48
diagnostic features of, 48
differential diagnosis of, 49
risk and prognostic factors for, 48
Somatic symptom disorder, 309, 310, 311–315
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
312
comorbidity with, 314–315
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 313
development and course of, 312–313
diagnostic criteria for, 311
diagnostic features of, 311–312
differential diagnosis of, 314
prevalence of, 312
risk and prognostic factors for, 313
Somatic symptoms and related disorders, 309–327
conversion disorder (functional neurological 
symptom disorder), 309, 310, 318–321
factitious disorder, 309, 310, 324–326
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
812–813
illness anxiety disorder, 309, 310, 315–318
other specified somatic symptom and related 
disorder, 309, 310, 327
psychological factors affecting other medical 
conditions, 309, 310, 322–324
somatic symptom disorder, 309, 310, 311–315
unspecified somatic symptom and related 
disorder, 309, 310, 327
Specific learning disorder, 32, 66–74
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 70
comorbidity with, 72, 74
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 72–73
development and course of, 70–72
diagnostic criteria for, 66–68
diagnostic features of, 68–70
differential diagnosis of, 73–74
functional consequences of, 73
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 73
prevalence of, 70
recording procedures for, 68
risk and prognostic factors for, 72Specific phobia, 189–190, 197–202
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 199
comorbidity with, 202
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 201
development and course of, 199–200
diagnostic criteria for, 197–198
diagnostic features of, 198–199
differential diagnosis of, 201–202
functional consequences of, 201
prevalence of, 199
risk and prognostic factors for, 200
specifiers for, 198
suicide risk in, 201
Specifiers, 21–22
Specifiers for bipolar and related disorders, 
149–154
Specifiers for depressive disorders, 184–188
Speech sound disorder, 31, 44–45
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 44
development and course of, 44–45
diagnostic criteria for, 44
diagnostic features of, 44
differential diagnosis of, 45
Spouse or partner abuse, psychological, 721–722
Spouse or partner neglect, 721
Spouse or partner violence
physical, 720
sexual, 720
Stereotypic movement disorder, 32, 77–80
comorbidity with, 80
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 79
development and course of, 79
diagnostic criteria for, 77–78
diagnostic features of, 78–79
differential diagnosis of, 79–80
prevalence of, 79
recording procedures for, 78
risk and prognostic factors for, 79
specifiers for, 78
Stimulant intoxication, 567–569
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 568
diagnostic criteria for, 567–568
diagnostic features of, 568
differential diagnosis of, 568–569
Stimulant-related disorders, 481, 561–570
diagnoses associated with, 482
other stimulant-indu ced disorders, 570
stimulant intoxication, 567–569
stimulant use disorder, 561–567
stimulant withdrawal, 484, 569–570
unspecified stimulant-related disorder, 570
Stimulant use disorder, 561–567
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
563–564
comorbidity with, 566–567
944 Index
Stimulant use disorder (continued)
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 565
development and course of, 564–565
diagnostic criteria for, 561–562
diagnostic features of, 563
diagnostic markers for, 565–566
differential diagnosis of, 566
functional consequences of, 566
prevalence of, 564
risk and prognostic factors for, 565
specifiers for, 563
Stimulant withdrawal, 484, 569–570
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 570
diagnostic criteria for, 569
differential diagnosis of, 570
Stroke, 46, 73, 117
bipolar disorder and, 146, 147
depressive disorders and, 164, 167, 181–182
Stuttering. See Childhood-onset fluency disorder 
(stuttering)
Substance-induced disorders, 481, 485–490. See 
also specific substances of abuse
alcohol-related, 497–503
caffeine-related, 503–508
cannabis-related, 516–519
hallucinogen-related, 527–533
inhalant-related, 538–540
opioid-related, 546–549
other (or unknown) substance–related, 581–585
sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related, 
556–560
substance intoxication and withdrawal, 481, 
485–487 ( See also  Intoxication; 
Withdrawal from substance)
associated with use of multiple substances, 
486
development and course of, 487
duration of effects and, 486
laboratory findings associated with, 
486–487
recording procedures for, 487
related to route of administration and 
speed of substance effects, 486
substance/medication-induced mental 
disorders, 481, 487–490
development and course of, 489
features of, 488–489
functional consequences of, 490
recording procedures for, 490
tobacco-related, 575–576
Substance intoxication delirium, 596–597, 598
Substance/medication-ind uced anxiety disorder, 
190, 226–230
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
228–229diagnostic criteria for, 226–227
diagnostic features of, 228
diagnostic markers for, 229
differential diagnosis of, 229–230
prevalence of, 229
recording procedures for, 227–228
Substance/medication-induced bipolar and 
related disorder, 123, 142–145
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 144
comorbidity with, 146
development and course of, 144–145
diagnostic criteria for, 142–143
diagnostic features of, 144
diagnostic markers for, 145
differential diagnosis of, 145
prevalence of, 144
recording procedures for, 143–144
Substance/medication-induced depressive 
disorder, 155, 175–180
comorbidity with, 180
development and course of, 178
diagnostic criteria for, 175–176
diagnostic features of, 177–178
diagnostic markers for, 179
differential diagnosis of, 179–180
prevalence of, 178
recording procedures for, 176–177
risk and prognostic factors for, 178–179
suicide risk in, 179
Substance/medication-induced neurocognitive 
disorder, 591, 603, 627–632
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 630
comorbidity with, 632
development and course of, 631
diagnostic criteria for, 627–629
diagnostic features of, 629–630
diagnostic markers for, 631
differential diagnosis of, 631
functional consequences of, 631
prevalence of, 630
recording procedures for, 629
risk and prognostic factors for, 631
Substance/medication-induced obsessive-
compulsive and related disorder, 235, 236, 
257–260
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 259
diagnostic criteria for, 257–258
diagnostic features of, 259
differential diagnosis of, 259–260
prevalence of, 259
recording procedures for, 258–259
Substance/medication-induced psychotic 
disorder, 89, 110–115
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 113
development and course of, 114
Index 945
diagnostic criteria for, 110–111
diagnostic features of, 112–113
diagnostic markers for, 114
differential diagnosis of, 114–115
functional consequences of, 114
prevalence of, 113
recording procedures for, 112
Substance/medication-induced sexual 
dysfunction, 423, 446–450
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
448–449
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 449
development and course of, 449
diagnostic criteria for, 446–447
diagnostic features of, 448
differential diagnosis of, 450
functional consequences of, 450
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 449
prevalence of, 449
recording procedures for, 447–448
Substance/medication-ind uced sleep disorder, 
413–420
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
416–418
comorbidity with, 420
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 418
development and course of, 418
diagnostic criteria for, 413–415
diagnostic features of, 416
diagnostic markers for, 419
differential diagnosis of, 419–420
functional consequences of, 419
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 418
recording procedures for, 415–416
relationship to International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, 420
risk and prognostic factors for, 418
Substance-related and addictive disorders, 
481–589
gambling disorder, 481, 585–589
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
815
substance-related disorders, 481–585 ( See also  
specific substances of abuse )
alcohol-related disorders, 490–503
caffeine-related disorders, 503–509
cannabis-related disorders, 509–519
diagnoses associated with substance class, 
482
drug classes in, 481
hallucinogen-related disorders, 520–533
inhalant-related disorders, 533–540
opioid-related disorders, 540–550
other (or unknown) substance–related 
disorders, 577–585sedative-, hypnotic- or anxiolytic-related 
disorders, 550–560
stimulant-related disorders, 561–570
substance-induced disorders, 481, 485–490
substance use disorders, 481, 483–485, 
490–585
tobacco-related disorders, 571–577
Substance use disorders, 481, 483–485
alcohol use disorder, 490–497
caffeine use disorder, 792–795
cannabis use disorder, 509–516
features of, 483–484
inhalant use disorder, 533–538
opioid use disorder, 541–546
other hallucinogen use disorder, 523–527
other (or unknown) substance use disorder, 
577–580
phencyclidine use disorder, 520–523
recording procedures for, 485
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, 
550–556
severity and specifiers for, 484
stimulant use disorder, 561–567
tobacco use disorder, 571–574
tolerance and withdrawal in, 484
Substance withdrawal delirium, 597, 598–599
Suicidal behavior disorder, 801–803
comorbidity with, 803
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 802
development and course of, 802
diagnostic features of, 801–802
diagnostic markers for, 802
functional consequences of, 802
proposed criteria for, 801
specifiers for, 801
Suicide risk
anorexia nervosa and, 343
bipolar I disorder and, 131
bipolar II disorder and, 138
body dysmorphic disorder and, 245
bulimia nervosa and, 349
depressive disorder due to another medical 
condition and, 182
depressive episodes with short-duration 
hypomania and, 788
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder and, 
158
dissociative amnesia and, 300
dissociative identity disorder and, 295
major depressive disorder and, 164, 167
neurobehavioral disorder associated with 
prenatal alcohol exposure and, 800
obsessive-compulsive disorder and, 240
opioid use disorder and, 544
other hallucinogen intoxication and, 530
946 Index
Suicide risk (continued)
panic attacks and, 215
panic disorder and, 212
persistent complex bereavement disorder and, 
791
posttraumatic stress disorder and, 278
psychotic disorder due to another medical 
condition and, 118
schizoaffective disorder and, 109
schizophrenia and, 104
separation anxiety disorder and, 193
specific phobia and, 201
substance/medication-induced depressive 
disorder and, 180
Susto,  836–837
Taijin kyofusho,  205, 837
Tardive akathisia, 712
Tardive dyskinesia, 22, 712
Tardive dystonia, 712
Technical terms, glossary of, 817–831
Tic disorders, 32, 81–85
comorbidity with, 83, 85
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 83
development and course of, 83
diagnostic criteria for, 81
diagnostic features of, 81–82
differential diagnosis of, 84
functional consequences of, 84
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 83, 84
other specified tic disorder, 85
prevalence of, 83
risk and prognostic factors for, 83
specifiers for, 81
unspecified tic disorder, 85
Tobacco-related disorders, 481, 571–577
diagnoses associated with, 482
other tobacco-induced disorders, 576
tobacco use disorder, 571–574
tobacco withdrawal, 484, 575–576
unspecified tobacco-related disorder, 577
Tobacco use disorder, 571–574
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 573
comorbidity with, 574
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 574
development and course of, 573
diagnostic criteria for, 571–572
diagnostic features of, 572–573
diagnostic markers for, 574
functional consequences of, 574
prevalence of, 573
risk and prognostic factors for, 573–574
specifiers for, 572
Tobacco withdrawal, 484, 575–576
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 575development and course of, 576
diagnostic criteria for, 575
diagnostic features of, 575
diagnostic markers for, 576
differential diagnosis of, 576
functional consequences of, 576
prevalence of, 576
risk and prognostic factors for, 576
Tolerance to substance effects, 484
Tourette’s disorder, 32. See also  Tic disorders
diagnostic criteria for, 81
diagnostic features of, 81–82
functional consequences of, 84
prevalence of, 83
risk and prognostic factors for, 83
Transvestic disorder, 685, 702–704
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
703
comorbidity with, 704
development and course of, 703–704
diagnostic criteria for, 702
diagnostic features of, 703
differential diagnosis of, 704
functional consequences of, 704
prevalence of, 703
specifiers for, 703
Trauma- and stressor-related disorders, 265–290
acute stress disorder, 265, 280–286
adjustment disorders, 265, 286–289
disinhibited social engagement disorder, 265, 
268–270
highlights of changes fr om DSM-IV to DSM-5, 
812
other specified trauma- and stressor-related 
disorder, 289
posttraumatic stress disorder, 265, 271–280
reactive attachment disorder, 265–268
unspecified trauma- and stressor-related 
disorder, 290
Traumatic brain injury
bipolar disorder and, 146
depressive disorders and, 181
dissociative amnesia and, 298, 299, 301
hoarding disorder and, 247, 250
major or mild neurocognitive disorder due to, 
591, 603, 624–627, 626
associated features supporting diagnosis 
of, 625
comorbidity with, 627
development and course of, 625–626
diagnostic criteria for, 624
diagnostic features of, 625
diagnostic markers for, 627
differential diagnosis of, 627
functional consequences of, 627
Index 947
prevalence of, 625
risk and prognostic factors for, 626–627
specifiers for, 625
neurodevelopmental disorders and, 38, 39, 44, 
73
psychotic disorders and, 99, 117
severity ratings for, 625, 626
trauma- and stressor-related disorders and, 
280, 281, 284, 286
Tremor, medication-induced, 712
Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder), 235, 236, 
251–254
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
252
comorbidity with, 254
culture-related diagnostic issues in, 253
development and course of, 253
diagnostic criteria for, 251
diagnostic features of, 251–252
diagnostic markers for, 253
differential diagnosis of, 253–254
functional consequences of, 253
prevalence of, 252
risk and prognostic factors for, 253
Trúng gió,  211, 212
Unspecified mental disorder, 15–16, 19–20, 708
due to another medical condition, 708
Vascular neurocognitive disorder, major or mild, 
591, 603, 621–624
associated features supporting diagnosis of, 
622
comorbidity with, 624
development and course of, 623
diagnostic criteria for, 621
diagnostic features of, 621–622
diagnostic markers for, 623
differential diagnosis of, 623–624
functional consequences of, 623
prevalence of, 622–623
risk and prognostic factors for, 623Voyeuristic disorder, 685, 686–688
comorbidity with, 688
development and course of, 688
diagnostic criteria for, 686–687
diagnostic features of, 687
differential diagnosis of, 688
gender-related diagnostic issues in, 688
prevalence of, 687–688
risk and prognostic factors for, 688
specifiers for, 687
Withdrawal from substance, 481, 485–487
alcohol, 499–501
caffeine, 506–508
cannabis, 517–519
delirium due to, 598
development and course of, 487
duration of effects and, 486
laboratory findings associated with, 486–487
multiple substances, 486
opioids, 484, 547–549
other (or unknown) substance, 583–584
recording procedures for, 487
related to route of administration and speed of 
substance effects, 486
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic, 484, 557–560
stimulant, 484, 569–570
tobacco, 484, 575–576
World Health Organization (WHO), 6, 23
International Classification of Diseases  (ICD), 21
revision process for ICD-11, 6, 10, 11–12
use of ICD-9-CM and ICD-10 codes, 12, 16, 
22, 23, 29
International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability and Health (ICF), 21, 734
World Health Organization Disability Assessment 
Schedule 2.0 (WHODAS), 16, 21, 734, 
745–748
additional scoring and interpretation guidance 
for DSM-5 users, 745–746
frequency of use of, 746
scoring instructions provided by WHO for, 745