707Other Mental
Disorders
Four disorders  are included in this chapter: ot her specified mental disorder due to
another medical condition; unsp ecified mental disorder due to another medical condition;
other specified mental disorder; and unspecified mental disorder. This residual category
applies to presentations in which symptoms char acteristic of a mental disorder that cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important ar-
eas of functioning predominate but do not meet  the full criteria for any other mental dis-
order in DSM-5. For other specified and un specified mental diso rders due to another
medical condition, it must be established that  the disturbance is caused by the physiolog-
ical effects of another medica l condition. If other specified and unspecified mental disor-
ders are due to another medi cal condition, it is necessary to code and list the medical
condition first (e.g., 042 [B20] HIV disease), fo llowed by the other spec ified or unspecified
mental disorder (use  appropriate code).
Other Specified Mental Disorder
Due to Another Medical Condition
294.8 (F06.8)
This category applies to presentations in whic h symptoms characteristic of a mental dis-
order due to another medical condition that cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other impor tant areas of functioning predominate but do
not meet the full criteria for any specific mental disorder attributable to another medical
condition. The other specified mental disor der due to another medical condition category
is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that
the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific mental disorder attributable to
another medical condition. This is done by recording the name of the disorder, with the
specific etiological medical condition inserted in place of “another medical condition,” fol-
lowed by the specific symptomatic manifestation that does not meet the criteria for any
specific mental disorder due to another medical condition. Furthermore, the diagnostic
code for the specific medical condition must be listed immediately before the code for the
other specified mental disorder due to anothe r medical condition. For example, dissocia-
tive symptoms due to complex partial seizures would be coded and recorded as 345.40
(G40.209), complex partial seizures 294.8 (F06. 8) other specified mental disorder due to
complex partial seizures, dissociative symptoms.
An example of a presentation that can be specified using the “other specified” desig-
nation is the following:
Dissociative symptoms:  This includes symptoms occurring, for example, in the con-
text of complex partial seizures.
708 Other Mental Disorders
Unspecified Mental Disorder
Due to Another Medical Condition
294.9 (F09)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a mental dis-
order due to another medical condition that cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other impor tant areas of functioning predominate but do
not meet the full criteria for any specific mental disorder due to another medical condition.
The unspecified mental disorder due to another  medical condition category is used in sit-
uations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met
for a specific mental disorder due to another medical condition, and includes presentations
for which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emer-
gency room settings). This is done by recording the name of the disorder, with the specific
etiological medical condition inserted in plac e of “another medical condition.” Furthermore,
the diagnostic code for the specific medical condition must be listed immediately before
the code for the unspecified mental disorder due to another medical condition. For exam-
ple, dissociative symptoms due to complex partial seizures would be coded and recorded
as 345.40 (G40.209) complex partial seizures , 294.9 (F06.9) unspecified mental disorder
due to complex partial seizures. 
Other Specified Mental Disorder
300.9 (F99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a mental dis-
order that cause clinically significant distre ss or impairment in social, occupational, or oth-
er important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any
specific mental disorder. The other specified m ental disorder category is used in situations
in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation
does not meet the criteria for any specific mental disorder. This is done by recording “other
specified mental disorder” followed by the specific reason.
Unspecified Mental Disorder
300.9 (F99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a mental dis-
order that cause clinically significant distre ss or impairment in social, occupational, or oth-
er important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any
mental disorder. The unspecified mental disorder category is used in situations in which
the clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific
mental disorder, and includes presentations for which there is insufficient information to
make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).