685Paraphilic
 Disorders
Paraphilic disorders  included in this manual are voyeuristic disorder (spying on
others in private activities), exhibitionisti c disorder (exposing th e genitals), frotteuristic
disorder (touching or rubbin g against a nonconsenting individual), sexual masochism
disorder (undergoing humiliation , bondage, or suffering), se xual sadism disorder (inflict-
ing humiliation, bondage, or suffering), pedophilic disorder (sexual focus on children), fe-
tishistic disorder (using nonliv ing objects or having a highly specific focus on nongenital
body parts), and transvestic disorder (engaging in sexua lly arousing cross-dressing).
These disorders have tr aditionally been selected for specific listing and assignment of ex-
plicit diagnostic criteria in DSM for two main  reasons: they are relatively common, in re-
lation to other paraphilic disorders, and some  of them entail actions for their satisfaction
that, because of their noxiousness or potentia l harm to others, are classed as criminal of-
fenses. The eight listed disorders do not exha ust the list of possible  paraphilic disorders.
Many dozens of distinct paraphilias have be en identified and named, and almost any of
them could, by virtue of its negative consequences for the individual or for others, rise to
the level of a paraphilic disorder. The diagno ses of the other specified and unspecified
paraphilic disorders are therefore indispensable and will be required in many cases.
In this chapter, the order of  presentation of the listed paraphilic disorders generally
corresponds to common classification scheme s for these conditions. The first group of
disorders is based on anomalous activi ty preferences.  These disorders are subdivided into
courtship disorders,  which resemble distorted components of human courtship behavior
(voyeuristic disorder, exhibitionistic di sorder, and frotteuristic disorder), and algolagnic
disorders,  which involve pain and suffering (sexual masochism disorder and sexual sadism
disorder). The second group of disorders is based on anomalous target preferences.  These
disorders include one directed at other hu mans (pedophilic disorder) and two directed
elsewhere (fetishistic  disorder and tran svestic disorder).
The term paraphilia  denotes any intense and persistent sexual interest other than sexual
interest in genital stimulation or preparator y fondling with phenotypically normal, phys-
ically mature, consenting human partners. In some circumstances, the criteria “intense
and persistent” may be difficult to apply, su ch as in the assessment of persons who are
very old or medically ill and who may not have  “intense” sexual interests of any kind. In
such circumstances, the term paraphilia  may be defined as any sexual interest greater than
or equal to normophilic sexual interests. There are also spec ific paraphilias that are gen-
erally better described as preferential  sexual interests than as intense sexual interests.
Some paraphilias primarily concern the indivi dual’s erotic activities, and others pri-
marily concern the individual’s erotic targets. Examples of  the former would include in-
tense and persistent interests in spanking, whipping, cutting, binding, or strangulating
another person, or an interest in these activiti es that equals or exceeds the individual’s in-
terest in copulation or equivalent interaction with another person. Examples of the latter
would include intense or preferential sexual in terest in children, corp ses, or amputees (as
a class), as well as intense or preferential in terest in nonhuman animals, such as horses or
dogs, or in inanimate obje cts, such as shoes or articles made of rubber.
A paraphilic disorder  is a paraphilia that is currently causing distress or impairment to the
individual or a paraphilia whose satisfaction has entailed personal harm, or risk of harm, to
686 Paraphilic Disorders
others. A paraphilia is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for having a paraphilic dis-
order, and a paraphilia by itself does not nece ssarily justify or require clinical intervention.
In the diagnostic criteria set for each of the listed paraphilic disorder s, Criterion A specifies
the qualitative nature of the paraphilia (e.g., an erotic focus on children or on exposing the gen-
itals to strangers), and Criterio n B specifies the negative conseq uences of the paraphilia (i.e.,
distress, impairment, or harm to  others). In keeping with the distinction between paraphilias
and paraphilic disorders, the term diagnosis  should be reserved for individuals who meet both
Criteria A and B (i.e., individuals who have a pa raphilic disorder). If an individual meets Cri-
terion A but not Criterion B for a particular paraphilia—a circumstance that might arise when
a benign paraphilia is discovered during the clinical investigation of some other condition—
then the individual may be said to have that paraphilia but not a paraphilic disorder.
It is not rare for an individual to manifest tw o or more paraphilias. In some cases, the para-
philic foci are closely related and the connectio n between the paraphilias is intuitively com-
prehensible (e.g., foot fetishism and shoe fetish ism). In other cases, th e connection between the
paraphilias is not obvious, and the presence of mu ltiple paraphilias may be coincidental or else
related to some generalized vulnerability to an omalies of psychosexual development. In any
event, comorbid diagnoses of separate paraphil ic disorders may be warranted if more than
one paraphilia is causing suffering to the individual or harm to others.
Because of the two-pronged nature of diag nosing paraphilic disorders, clinician-rated
or self-rated measures and se verity assessments could addre ss either the strength of the
paraphilia itself or the seriousness of its co nsequences. Although the distress and impair-
ment stipulated in the Criterio n B are special in being the im mediate or ultimate result of
the paraphilia and not primarily the result of some other factor, the phenomena of reactive
depression, anxiety, guilt, poor work history, impaired social relations, and so on are not
unique in themselves and may be quantified  with multipurpose measures of psychosocial
functioning or quality of life.
The most widely applicable framework for assessing the strength of a paraphilia itself
is one in which examinees’ paraphilic sexual fa ntasies, urges, or beha viors are evaluated in
relation to their normophilic sexual interests and behaviors. In a clinical interview or on
self-administered questionnair es, examinees can be asked whether their paraphilic sexual
fantasies, urges, or behaviors are weaker th an, approximately equal to, or stronger than
their normophilic sexual intere sts and behaviors. This same type of comparison can be,
and usually is, employed in psychophysiological  measures of sexual interest, such as pe-
nile plethysmography in males or viewing time in males and females.
Voyeuristic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 302.82 (F65.3)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from observ-
ing an unsuspecting person who is naked, in the process of disrobing, or engaging in
sexual activity, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors. 
B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges with a nonconsenting person, or the
sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The individual experiencing the arousal and/or acting on the urges is at least 18 years
of age.
Specify if:
In a controlled environment:  This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living
in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in voyeuristic behavior
are restricted.
Voyeuristic Disorder 687
In full remission:  The individual has not acted on the urges with a nonconsenting per-
son, and there has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other ar-
eas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.
Specifiers
The “in full remission” specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of
voyeurism per se, which may still be present af ter behaviors and dist ress have remitted. 
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for voyeuristic disorder can apply both to individuals who more or less
freely disclose this paraphilic interest and to those who categorically deny any sexual arousal
from observing an unsuspecting person who is na ked, disrobing, or engaged in sexual activity
despite substantial objective evidence to the cont rary. If disclosing individuals also report dis-
tress or psychosocial problems because of thei r voyeuristic sexual pref erences, they could be
diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder. On the ot her hand, if they declare no distress, demon-
strated by lack of anxiety, obse ssions, guilt, or shame, about these paraphilic impulses and are
not impaired in other im portant areas of functioning because of this sexual interest, and their
psychiatric or legal histories indicate that they  do not act on it, they could be ascertained as
having voyeuristic sexual interest but should not  be diagnosed with voyeuristic disorder. 
Nondisclosing individuals include, for example, individuals known to have been spy-
ing repeatedly on unsuspecting persons who ar e naked or engaging in sexual activity on
separate occasions but who deny any urges or fantasies concerning such sexual behavior,
and who may report that known episodes of wa tching unsuspecting naked or sexually ac-
tive persons were all accidental and nonsexual. Others may disclose past episodes of ob-
serving unsuspecting naked or sexually ac tive persons but contest any significant or
sustained sexual interest in this behavior. Since these individuals deny having fantasies or
impulses about watching others nude or involv ed in sexual activity, it follows that they
would also reject feeling subjectively distressed  or socially impaired by such impulses. De-
spite their nondisclosing stance, such individuals may be diagnosed with voyeuristic dis-
order. Recurrent voyeuristic behavior cons titutes sufficient suppo rt for voyeurism (by
fulfilling Criterion A) and simult aneously demonstrates that this paraphilically motivated
behavior is causing harm to ot hers (by fulfilling Criterion B).
“Recurrent” spying on unsuspecting persons who are naked or engaging in sexual ac-
tivity (i.e., multiple victims, each on a separate oc casion) may, as a general rule, be inter-
preted as three or more victim s on separate occasions. Fewer victims can be interpreted as
satisfying this criterion if there were multiple  occasions of watching the same victim or if
there is corroborating evidence of a distinct or preferential interest in secret watching of
naked or sexually acti ve unsuspecting persons. Note th at multiple victims, as suggested
earlier, are a sufficient but not a necessary cond ition for diagnosis; the criteria may also be
met if the individual acknowledges intense voyeuristic sexual interest. 
The Criterion A time frame, indicating that  signs or symptoms of voyeurism must have
persisted for at least 6 months , should also be understood as a general guideline, not a
strict threshold, to ensure that the sexual in terest in secretly watching unsuspecting naked
or sexually active others is not merely transient. 
Adolescence and puberty generally increase sexual curiosity and activity. To alleviate
the risk of pathologizing normative sexual in terest and behavior during pubertal adoles-
cence, the minimum age for the diagnosis of voye uristic disorder is 18 years (Criterion C).
Prevalence
Voyeuristic acts are the most common of pote ntially law-breaking sexual behaviors. The
population prevalence of voyeuristic disorder  is unknown. However, based on voyeuris-
688 Paraphilic Disorders
tic sexual acts in nonclinical samples, the highest possible lifetime prevalence for voyeuris-
tic disorder is approximately 12% in males and 4% in females.
Development and Course
Adult males with voyeuristic disorder often first become aware of their sexual interest in
secretly watching unsuspecti ng persons during adolescence. However, the minimum age
for a diagnosis of voyeuristic disorder is 18 years because there is substantial difficulty in
differentiating it from age-appropriate pubert y-related sexual curiosity and activity. The
persistence of voyeurism over time is unclear. Voyeuristic disorder, however, per defini-
tion requires one or more contributing factors that may change over time with or without
treatment: subjective distress (e.g., guilt, sh ame, intense sexual fr ustration, loneliness),
psychiatric morbidity, hypersex uality, and sexual impulsivit y; psychosocial impairment;
and/or the propensity to act out sexually by spying on unsuspecting naked or sexually ac-
tive persons. Therefore, the course of voyeuristic disorder is likely to vary with age.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Voyeurism is a necessary precondition  for voyeuristic disorder; hence,
risk factors for voyeurism sh ould also increase the rate of voyeuristic disorder.
Environmental. Childhood sexual abuse, substance misuse, and sexual preoccupation/
hypersexuality have been suggested as risk fa ctors, although the causal relationship to
voyeurism is uncertain and the specificity unclear. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Voyeuristic disorder is very uncommon among females in clinical settings, while the male-
to-female ratio for single sexually ar ousing voyeuristic acts might be 3:1.
Differential Diagnosis
Conduct disorder and antiso cial personality disorder. Conduct disorder in adolescents
and antisocial personality disorder would be  characterized by additional norm-breaking
and antisocial behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in secretly watching unsuspect-
ing others who are naked or engaging in  sexual activity should be lacking. 
Substance use disorders. Substance use disorders might involve single voyeuristic ep-
isodes by intoxicated individuals but should no t involve the typical sexual interest in se-
cretly watching unsuspecting persons being na ked or engaging in sexual activity. Hence,
recurrent voyeuristic sexual fantasies, urges, or behaviors that occu r also when the indi-
vidual is not intoxicated suggest that voyeuristic disorder might be present.
Comorbidity
Known comorbidities in voyeur istic disorder are largely b ased on research with males
suspected of or convicted for acts involving the secret watching of unsuspecting nude or
sexually active persons. Hence, these comorb idities might not apply to all individuals with
voyeuristic disorder. Conditions  that occur comorbidly with voyeuristic disorder include
hypersexuality and other paraphilic disorders, particularly exhibitionistic disorder. De-
pressive, bipolar, anxiety, an d substance use disorders; a ttention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder; and conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder ar e also frequent co-
morbid conditions.
Exhibitionistic Disorder 689
Exhibitionistic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 302.4 (F65.2)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the ex-
posure of one’s genitals to an unsuspecting person, as manifested by fantasies, urges,
or behaviors. 
B. The individual has acted on these sexual  urges with a nonconsenting person, or the
sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
Sexually aroused by exposing ge nitals to prepubertal children
Sexually aroused by exposing genitals  to physically mature individuals
Sexually aroused by exposing genitals to prepubertal children and to physically
mature individuals
Specify if:
In a controlled environment:  This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living in
institutional or other settings where opportunities to expose one’s genitals are restricted.
In full remission:  The individual has not acted on the urges with a nonconsenting per-
son, and there has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other ar-
eas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.
Subtypes
The subtypes for exhibitionistic disorder are ba sed on the age or physical maturity of the non-
consenting individuals to whom the individual prefers to expose his or her genitals. The non-
consenting individuals could be prepubescent children, adults, or both. This specifier should
help draw adequate attention to  characteristics of victims of individuals with exhibitionistic
disorder to prevent co-occurring pedophilic di sorder from be ing overlooked. However, indi-
cations that the individual with exhibitionistic disorder is sexually attracted to exposing his or
her genitals to children should not preclude a diagnosis of pedophilic disorder.
Specifiers
The “in full remission” specifier does not addr ess the continued presence or absence of ex-
hibitionism per se, which may still be present after behaviors and distress have remitted. 
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for exhibitionistic diso rder can apply both to individuals who more or
less freely disclose this paraphilia and to those who categorically deny any sexual attraction to
exposing their genitals to unsuspecting persons despite substantial objective evidence to the
contrary. If disclosing individuals also report ps ychosocial difficulties because of their sexual
attractions or preferences for exposing, they ma y be diagnosed with exhibitionistic disorder. In
contrast, if they declare no distress (exemplified by absence of anxiety, obsessions, and guilt or
shame about these paraphilic impulses) and are not impaired by this sexual interest in other
important areas of functioning, and their self-rep orted, psychiatric, or legal histories indicate
that they do not act on them, they could be asce rtained as having exhibi tionistic sexual interest
but not be diagnosed with exhibitionistic disorder. 
Examples of nondisclosing individuals in clude those who have exposed themselves
repeatedly to unsuspecting persons on separa te occasions but who deny any urges or fan-
690 Paraphilic Disorders
tasies about such sexual behavior and who re port that known episodes of exposure were
all accidental and nonsexual. Others may disclo se past episodes of sexual behavior involv-
ing genital exposure but refute any significant or sustained sexual interest in such behav-
ior. Since these individuals deny having urge s or fantasies involving genital exposure, it
follows that they would also deny feeling subjectively distressed or socially impaired by
such impulses. Such individuals may be diagnosed with exhibitionistic disorder despite
their negative self-report. Re current exhibitionistic behavior constitutes sufficient support
for exhibitionism (Criterion A)  and simultaneously demonstrat es that this paraphilically
motivated behavior is causing harm to others (Criterion B).
“Recurrent” genital exposure to unsuspecting others (i.e., multiple victims, each on a
separate occasion) may, as a ge neral rule, be interpreted as three or more victims on sep-
arate occasions. Fewer victims can be interpreted as satisfying this criterion if there were
multiple occasions of exposure to the same victim, or if th ere is corroborating evidence of
a strong or preferential interest in genital exposure to unsuspecting persons. Note that
multiple victims, as suggested earlier, are a sufficient but not a necessary condition for di-
agnosis, as criteria may be met by an indi vidual’s acknowledging intense exhibitionistic
sexual interest with distress and/or impairment.
The Criterion A time frame, indicating that signs or sy mptoms of exhibitionism must
have persisted for at least 6 months, should also be understo od as a general guideline, not
a strict threshold, to ensure that the sexual interest in exposing one’s genitals to unsuspect-
ing others is not merely transient. This migh t be expressed in clear evidence of repeated
behaviors or distress ov er a nontransient period  shorter than 6 months. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of exhibitionistic disorder is unknown. However, based on exhibitionistic
sexual acts in nonclinical or general populati ons, the highest possible prevalence for exhi-
bitionistic disorder in the male population is 2%–4%. The prevalence of exhibitionistic dis-
order in females is even more uncertain but is  generally believed to be much lower than in
males. 
Development and Course
Adult males with exhibitionistic disorder often report that they first became aware of sex-
ual interest in exposing their genitals to unsuspecting persons during adolescence, at a
somewhat later time than the typical development of normative sexual interest in women
or men. Although there is no minimum age re quirement for the diagno sis of exhibitionis-
tic disorder, it may be difficult to different iate exhibitionistic be haviors from age-appro-
priate sexual curiosity in adolescents. Wher eas exhibitionistic impulses appear to emerge
in adolescence or early adulthood, very little is known about persistence over time. By def-
inition, exhibitionistic disord er requires one or more contributing factors, which may
change over time with or without treatment; subjective distress (e.g., guilt, shame, intense
sexual frustration, lo neliness), mental disorder comorb idity, hypersexuality, and sexual
impulsivity; psychosocial impair ment; and/or the propensity to act out sexually by expos-
ing the genitals to unsuspecting persons. Ther efore, the course of exhibitionistic disorder
is likely to vary with age. As with other sexual preferences, advancing age may be associ-
ated with decreasing exhibitionistic  sexual preferences and behavior.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Since exhibitionism is a necessary pr econdition for exhibitionistic dis-
order, risk factors for exhibiti onism should also increase the rate of exhibitionistic disor-
der. Antisocial history, antisocial person ality disorder, alcohol misuse, and pedophilic
sexual preference might increase risk of se xual recidivism in ex hibitionistic offenders.
Frotteuristic Disorder 691
Hence, antisocial personality disorder, alco hol use disorder, and pedophilic interest may
be considered risk factors for exhibitionistic disorder in males with exhibitionistic sexual
preferences.
Environmental. Childhood sexual and emotional abus e and sexual preoccupation/hyper-
sexuality have been suggested as risk factor s for exhibitionism, al though the causal rela-
tionship to exhibitionism is unce rtain and the specificity unclear. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Exhibitionistic disorder is highly unusual in females, whereas single sexually arousing ex-
hibitionistic acts might occur up to half as often among women compared with men.
Functional Consequences of  Exhibitionistic Disorder
The functional consequences of exhibitionisti c disorder have not been addressed in re-
search involving individuals who have not acte d out sexually by exposing their genitals to
unsuspecting strangers but who fulfill Criterio n B by experiencing intense emotional dis-
tress over these preferences.
Differential Diagnosis
Potential differential diagnose s for exhibitionistic disorder sometimes occur also as co-
morbid disorders. Therefore, it is generally necessary to evaluate the evidence for exhibi-
tionistic disorder and ot her possible conditions as separate questions. 
Conduct disorder and antisocial personality disorder. Conduct disorder in adolescents
and antisocial personality disorder would be characterized by additional norm-breaking and
antisocial behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in exposing the genitals should be lacking. 
Substance use disorders. Alcohol and substance use di sorders might involve single
exhibitionistic episodes by intoxicated individuals but should not involve the typical sex-
ual interest in exposing the genitals to unsusp ecting persons. Hence, recurrent exhibition-
istic sexual fantasies, urges, or behaviors that occur also when the individual is not
intoxicated suggest that exhibitionistic disorder might be present.
Comorbidity
Known comorbidities in exhibitionistic disorder are largely based on research with indi-
viduals (almost all males) convicted for criminal acts involving genital exposure to non-
consenting individuals. Hence,  these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals who
qualify for a diagnosis of exhibitionistic diso rder. Conditions that occur comorbidly with
exhibitionistic disorder at high rates includ e depressive, bipolar, anxiety, and substance
use disorders; hypersexuality; attention-deficit/hyperactiv ity disorder; other paraphilic
disorders; and antisocial  personality disorder. 
Frotteuristic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 302.89 (F65.81)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from touching
or rubbing against a nonconsenting person, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or be-
haviors.
B. The individual has acted on these sexual  urges with a nonconsenting person, or the
sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
692 Paraphilic Disorders
Specify if:
In a controlled environment:  This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living
in institutional or other settings where opportunities to touch or rub against a noncon-
senting person are restricted. 
In full remission:  The individual has not acted on the urges with a nonconsenting per-
son, and there has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other ar-
eas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.
Specifiers
The “in remission” specifier does not address the continued presence or absence of frot-
teurism per se, which may still be present af ter behaviors and distress have remitted. 
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for frotteuristic disord er can apply both to in dividuals who relatively
freely disclose this paraphilia and to those wh o firmly deny any sexual attraction from touch-
ing or rubbing against a nonconsenting individual regardless of considerable objective evi-
dence to the contrary. If disclo sing individuals also report psychosocial impairment due to
their sexual preferences for touching or ru bbing against a nonconsenting individual, they
could be diagnosed with frotteuristic disorder. In  contrast, if they declare no distress (demon-
strated by lack of anxiety, ob sessions, guilt, or shame) about these paraphilic impulses and are
not impaired in other im portant areas of functioning because of this sexual interest, and their
psychiatric or legal histories indicate that they  do not act on it, they could be ascertained as
having frotteuristic sexual interest but should not  be diagnosed with frotteuristic disorder.
Nondisclosing individuals include, for in stance, individuals known to have been
touching or rubbing against nonconsenting individuals on separate occasions but who
contest any urges or fantasies concerning such  sexual behavior. Such individuals may re-
port that identified episodes of touching or rubbing against an unwilling individual were
all unintentional and nonsexual. Others may disc lose past episodes of touching or rubbing
against nonconsenting individuals but contest any major or persistent  sexual interest in
this. Since these individuals deny having fant asies or impulses about touching or rubbing,
they would consequently reject feeling dist ressed or psychosocially impaired by such
impulses. Despite their nondisclosing position, such individuals may be diagnosed with
frotteuristic disorder. Recurrent  frotteuristic behavior constitutes satisfactory support for
frotteurism (by fulfilling Criterion A) and co ncurrently demonstrates that this paraphili-
cally motivated behavior is causing harm  to others (by fulfilling Criterion B).
“Recurrent” touching or rubbing against a no nconsenting individual (i.e., multiple vic-
tims, each on a separate occasion) may, as a ge neral rule, be interpreted as three or more vic-
tims on separate occasions. Fewer victims can be interpreted as satisfying this criterion if
there were multiple occasions of touching or rubbing agains t the same unwilling individ-
ual, or corroborating evidence of a strong or preferential interest in touching or rubbing
against nonconsenting individuals. Note that mu ltiple victims are a sufficient but not a nec-
essary condition for diagnosis; criteria may also be met if the individual acknowledges in-
tense frotteuristic sexual inte rest with clinically significant distress and/or impairment. 
The Criterion A time frame, indicating that si gns or symptoms of frotteurism must persist
for at least 6 months, should also  be interpreted as a general guid eline, not a strict threshold, to
ensure that the sexual interest in touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting individual is not
transient. Hence, the duration part of Criterion A may also be met if there is clear evidence of
recurrent behaviors or distress over a shorter but nontrans ient time period. 
Prevalence
Frotteuristic acts, including the uninvited sexu al touching of or rubbing against another
individual, may occur in up to 30% of adult males in the general population. Approximately
Frotteuristic Disorder 693
10%–14% of adult males seen in outpatient se ttings for paraphilic disorders and hypersex-
uality have a presentation that meets diagnost ic criteria for frotteuristic disorder. Hence,
whereas the population prev alence of frotteuristic disorder  is unknown, it is not likely that
it exceeds the rate found in selected clinical settings. 
Development and Course
Adult males with frotteuristic disorder often re port first becoming aware of their sexual in-
terest in surreptitiously touching unsuspecting persons during late adolescence or emerging
adulthood. However, children and adolescents may also touch or rub against unwilling oth-
ers in the absence of a diagnosis of frotteuris tic disorder. Although th ere is no minimum age
for the diagnosis, frotteuristic disorder can be difficult to di fferentiate from conduct-disor-
dered behavior without sexual motivation in individuals at younger ages. The persistence of
frotteurism over time is unclear. Frotteuristic disorder, however, by de finition requires one
or more contributing factors that may change over time with or without treatment: subjec-
tive distress (e.g., guilt, shame,  intense sexual frustration, loneliness); psychiatric morbidity;
hypersexuality and sexual impulsivity; psycho social impairment; and/ or the propensity to
act out sexually by touching or  rubbing against unconsenting persons. Therefore, the course
of frotteuristic disorder is like ly to vary with age. As with other sexual preferences, advanc-
ing age may be associated with decreasing fr otteuristic sexual preferences and behavior. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Nonsexual antisocial behavior and sexual preoccupation/hypersexuality
might be nonspecific risk factors, although the causal relationship to frotteurism is uncertain
and the specificity unclear. However, frotteurism is a necessary precondition for frotteuristic
disorder, so risk factors for frot teurism should also increase the rate of frotteuristic disorder. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
There appear to be substantially fewer female s with frotteuristic sexual preferences than
males. 
Differential Diagnosis
Conduct disorder and antiso cial personality disorder. Conduct disorder in adolescents
and antisocial personality disorder would be  characterized by additional norm-breaking
and antisocial behaviors, and the specific sexual interest in touching or rubbing against a
nonconsenting individual should be lacking. 
Substance use disorders. Substance use disorders, particularly those involving stimu-
lants such as cocaine and amphetamines, might involve single frotteuristic episodes by in-
toxicated individuals but should not involve the typical sustained sexual interest in
touching or rubbing against unsuspecting persons. Hence, recurrent frotteuristic sexual
fantasies, urges, or be haviors that occur also when the individual is not intoxicated sug-
gest that frotteuristic d isorder might be present.
Comorbidity
Known comorbidities in frotteuristic disorder  are largely based on research with males
suspected of or convicted for criminal acts involving sexually motivated touching of or
rubbing against a nonconsentin g individual. Hence, these co morbidities might not apply
to other individuals with a diagnosis of frotte uristic disorder based on subjective distress
over their sexual interest. Conditions that o ccur comorbidly with frot teuristic disorder in-
clude hypersexuality and other paraphilic disord ers, particularly exhibitionistic disorder
and voyeuristic disorder. Conduct disorder, antisocial personality disorder, depressive
694 Paraphilic Disorders
disorders, bipolar disorders, anxiety disorders, and substanc e use disorders also co-occur.
Potential differential diagnoses for frotteuristic disorder so metimes occur also as comor-
bid disorders. Therefore, it is generally necessary to evaluate  the evidence for frotteuristic
disorder and possible comorbid co nditions as separate questions. 
Sexual Masochism Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 302.83 (F65.51)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the act
of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer, as manifested by fan-
tasies, urges, or behaviors.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With asphyxiophilia:  If the individual engages in the practice of achieving sexual
arousal related to restriction of breathing.
Specify if:
In a controlled environment:  This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living
in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in masochistic sexual
behaviors are restricted.
In full remission:  There has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other areas of functioning for at last 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for sexual masochism disorder are intended to apply to individuals
who freely admit to having such paraphilic interests. Such individuals openly acknowl-
edge intense sexual arousal from the act of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise
made to suffer, as manifested by  fantasies, urges, or behaviors. If these individuals also re-
port psychosocial difficulties because of thei r sexual attractions or preferences for being
humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer, they may be diagnosed with sex-
ual masochism disorder. In contrast, if they de clare no distress, exemplified by anxiety, ob-
sessions, guilt, or shame, about these paraphi lic impulses, and are not hampered by them
in pursuing other personal goals, they coul d be ascertained as having masochistic sexual
interest but should not be diagnosed with sexual masochism disorder.
The Criterion A time frame, indicating that the signs or symptoms  of sexual masoch-
ism must have persisted for at least 6 months, should be understood as a general guideline,
not a strict threshold, to ensure that the sexual interest in being humiliated, beaten, bound,
or otherwise made to suffer is not merely transient. However, the disorder can be diag-
nosed in the context of a clearly sustained but shorter time period.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The extensive use of pornography involving the ac t of being humiliated, beaten, bound, or oth-
erwise made to suffer is sometimes an asso ciated feature of sexual masochism disorder.
Prevalence
The population prevalence of sexual masochis m disorder is unknown. In Australia, it has
been estimated that 2.2% of males and 1.3% of females had been involved in bondage and
discipline, sadomasochism, or dominance and submissio n in the past 12 months. 
Sexual Sadism Disorder 695
Development and Course
Community individuals with paraphilias have reported a mean age at onset for masoch-
ism of 19.3 years, although earlier ages, in cluding puberty and childhood, have also been
reported for the onset of masochistic fantasi es. Very little is known about persistence over
time. Sexual masochism disorder per definition  requires one or more contributing factors,
which may change over time with or without treatment. These include subjective distress
(e.g., guilt, shame, intense sexual frustration,  loneliness), psychiatri c morbidity, hypersex-
uality and sexual impulsivity, and psychosocial  impairment. Therefore, the course of sex-
ual masochism disorder is likely to vary with age. Advancing age is likely to have the same
reducing effect on sexual preference involvin g sexual masochism as it has on other para-
philic or normophilic sexual behavior. 
Functional Consequences of Sexual Masochism Disorder
The functional consequences of sexual maso chism disorder are unknown. However, mas-
ochists are at risk of accidental death while practicing asphyxiophilia or other autoerotic
procedures. 
Differential Diagnosis
Many of the conditions that could be differ ential diagnoses for sexual masochism disorder
(e.g., transvestic fetishism, sexual sadism di sorder, hypersexuality, alcohol and substance
use disorders) sometimes occur also as comorbid diagnoses. Therefore, it is necessary to
carefully evaluate the evidence for sexual masochism disorder, keep ing the possibility of
other paraphilias or other mental  disorders as part of the di fferential diagnosis. Sexual
masochism in the absence of distress (i.e., no disorder) is also includ ed in the differential,
as individuals who conduct the behaviors may be satisfied with thei r masochistic interest.
Comorbidity
Known comorbidities with sexu al masochism disorder are largely based on individuals in
treatment. Disorders that occur comorbidly wi th sexual masochism disorder typically in-
clude other paraphilic disorders,  such as transvestic fetishism.
Sexual Sadism Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 302.84 (F65.52)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from the phys-
ical or psychological suffering of another person, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or
behaviors.
B. The individual has acted on these sexual  urges with a nonconsenting person, or the
sexual urges or fantasies cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
In a controlle d environment:  This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living
in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in sadistic sexual behav-
iors are restricted.
In full remission:  The individual has not acted on the urges with a nonconsenting per-
son, and there has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other ar-
eas of functioning, for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.
696 Paraphilic Disorders
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for sexual sadism disord er are intended to apply both to individuals
who freely admit to having such paraphilic interests and to those who deny any sexual interest
in the physical or psychological suffering of another individual despite substantial objective
evidence to the contrary. Indivi duals who openly acknowledge in tense sexual interest in the
physical or psychological suffering of others are referred to as “admitting individuals.” If these
individuals also report psychosocial difficulties because of their sexual  attractions or prefer-
ences for the physical or psychological suffering of another individual, they may be diagnosed
with sexual sadism disorder. In contrast, if admitting individuals declare no distress, exempli-
fied by anxiety, obsessions, gu ilt, or shame, about these para philic impulses, and are not ham-
pered by them in pursuing other goals, and thei r self-reported, psychiat ric, or legal histories
indicate that they do not act on them, then they  could be ascertained as having sadistic sexual
interest but they would not meet criteria for sexual sadism disorder.
Examples of individuals who deny any interest in the physical or psychological suffering
of another individual include in dividuals known to have inflicted pain or suffering on mul-
tiple victims on separate occasions but who de ny any urges or fantasies about such sexual
behavior and who may further claim that known episodes of sexual assault were either un-
intentional or nonsexual. Others may admit past  episodes of sexual behavior involving the
infliction of pain or suffering on a nonconsenting individual but do not report any significant
or sustained sexual interest in the physical or  psychological suffering of another individual.
Since these individuals deny having urges or fantasies involving sexual arousal to pain and
suffering, it follows that they would also deny feeling subjectively distressed or socially im-
paired by such impulses. Such individuals may be diagnosed with sexual sadism disorder
despite their negative self-report. Their recurrent behavior constitutes clinical support for
the presence of the paraphilia of sexual sadi sm (by satisfying Criterion A) and simultane-
ously demonstrates that their paraphilically motivated behavior is causing clinically signif-
icant distress, harm, or risk of harm  to others (satisfying Criterion B).
“Recurrent” sexual sadism invo lving nonconsenting others (i .e., multiple victims, each
on a separate occasion) may, as general rule , be interpreted as three or more victims on
separate occasions. Fewer victims can be interpre ted as satisfying this criterion, if there are
multiple instances of infliction of pain and su ffering to the same victim, or if there is cor-
roborating evidence of a strong  or preferential interest in  pain and suffering involving
multiple victims. Note that multiple victims, as suggested earlier, are a sufficient but not
a necessary condition for diagnosis, as the crit eria may be met if the individual acknowl-
edges intense sadistic sexual interest. 
The Criterion A time frame, indicating that  the signs or symptoms of sexual sadism
must have persisted for at least 6 months, should also be understood as a general guide-
line, not a strict threshold, to ensure that the sexual interest in inflicting pain and suffering
on nonconsenting victims is not merely tran sient. However, the diagnosis may be met if
there is a clearly sustaine d but shorter period of sadistic behaviors. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The extensive use of pornography involving the inflic tion of pain and suffering is some-
times an associated  feature of sexual  sadism disorder.
Prevalence
The population prevalence of sexual sadism  disorder is unknown and is largely based on
individuals in forensic settings. Depending on the criteria for sexual sadism, prevalence
varies widely, from 2% to 30%. Among civi lly committed sexual offenders in the United
States, less than 10% have sexual sadism. Among individuals who have committed sexu-
ally motivated homicides, rates of sexual  sadism disorder range from 37% to 75%. 
Pedophilic Disorder 697
Development and Course
Individuals with sexual sadism in forensic samples are almost exclusively male, but a rep-
resentative sample of the population in Aust ralia reported that 2.2% of men and 1.3% of
women said they had been involved in bondage and discipline, “sadomasochism,” or dom-
inance and submission in the previous year . Information on the development and course
of sexual sadism disorder is extremely lim ited. One study reported that females became
aware of their sadomasochistic interest as young adults, and another reported that the
mean age at onset of sadism in a group of males was 19.4 years. Whereas sexual sadism per
se is probably a lifelong characteristic, sexu al sadism disorder may fluctuate according to
the individual’s subjective distress or his or her propensity to harm nonconsenting others.
Advancing age is likely to have the same reducing effect on this disorder as it has on other
paraphilic or normophilic sexual behavior.
Differential Diagnosis
Many of the conditions that could be diffe rential diagnoses for sexual sadism disorder
(e.g., antisocial pers onality disorder, sexual masochism disorder, hypersexuality, sub-
stance use disorders) sometime s occur also as comorb id diagnoses. Therefore, it is neces-
sary to carefully evaluate the evidence for sexual sadism disorder, keeping the possibility
of other paraphilias or mental disorders as pa rt of the differential diagnosis. The majority
of individuals who are active in community networks that pr actice sadistic and masoch-
istic behaviors do not express any dissatisfaction  with their sexual interests, and their be-
havior would not meet DSM-5 criteria for sexual  sadism disorder. Sadi stic interest, but not
the disorder, may be considered in the differential diagnosis.
Comorbidity
Known comorbidities with sexual sadism diso rder are largely based on individuals (al-
most all males) convicted for criminal acts involving sadistic acts against nonconsenting
victims. Hence, these comorbidities might not apply to all individuals who never engaged
in sadistic activity with a nonconsenting vi ctim but who qualify for a diagnosis of sexual
sadism disorder based on subjec tive distress over their sexual  interest. Diso rders that are
commonly comorbid with sexual sadism diso rder include other paraphilic disorders.
Pedophilic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 302.2 (F65.4)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent, intense sexually arousing fantasies, sex-
ual urges, or behaviors involving sexual activity with a prepubescent child or children
(generally age 13 years or younger).
B. The individual has acted on these sexual urges, or the sexual urges or fantasies cause
marked distress or interpersonal difficulty.
C. The individual is at least age 16 years and at  least 5 years older than the child or chil-
dren in Criterion A.
Note:  Do not include an individual in late adolescence involved in an ongoing sexual
relationship with a 12- or 13-year-old.
Specify whether:
Exclusive type  (attracted only to children)
Nonexclusive type
698 Paraphilic Disorders
Specify if:
Sexually attracted to males
Sexually attracted to females
Sexually attracted to both
Specify if:
Limited to incest
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic criteria for pedophilic disorder are intended to apply both to individuals who
freely disclose this paraphilia and to individuals who deny any sexual attraction to prepuber-
tal children (generally age 13 years or younger) , despite substantial objective evidence to the
contrary. Examples of disclosing this paraphilia include candidly acknowledging an intense
sexual interest in children and indicating that sexual interest in children is greater than or equal
to sexual interest in physically mature individuals. If individuals also complain that their sex-
ual attractions or preferences for children are caus ing psychosocial difficulties, they may be di-
agnosed with pedophilic disorder. However, if they report an absence of feelings of guilt,
shame, or anxiety about these impulses and are not functionally limited by their paraphilic im-
pulses (according to self-repor t, objective assessment, or both), and their self-reported and le-
gally recorded histories indicate that they ha ve never acted on their impulses, then these
individuals have a pedophilic sexual interest but not pedophilic disorder.
Examples of individuals who deny attraction to children include individuals who are
known to have sexually approached multiple children on separate occasions but who deny
any urges or fantasies about sexual behavior involving children, and who may further claim
that the known episodes of physical contact were  all unintentional and nonsexual. Other indi-
viduals may acknowledge past episodes of sexual behavior involving children but deny any
significant or sustained sexual interest in children. Since these individuals may deny experi-
ences impulses or fantasies involving children, they may also deny feeling subjectively dis-
tressed. Such individuals may still be diagnosed with pedophilic disorder despite the absence
of self-reported distress, provided that there is  evidence of recurrent behaviors persisting for
6 months (Criterion A) and evidence that the individual has acted on sexual urges or experi-
enced interpersonal difficulties as a cons equence of the disorder (Criterion B).
Presence of multiple victims, as discussed above, is su fficient but not necessary for di-
agnosis; that is, the individual can still meet  Criterion A by merely acknowledging intense
or preferential sexual interest in children. 
The Criterion A clause, indicating that the signs or symptoms of pedophilia have per-
sisted for 6 months or longer, is  intended to ensure that the sexual attraction to children is
not merely transient. However, the diagnosis ma y be made if there is  clinical evidence of
sustained persistence of the sexual attraction to children even if the 6-month duration can-
not be precisely determined.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The extensive use of pornography depicting prepubescent children is a useful diagnostic
indicator of pedophilic disorder. This is a specific instance of the general case that individ-
uals are likely to choose the kind of pornography  that corresponds to their sexual interests.
Prevalence
The population prevalence of pedophilic disorder is unknown.  The highest possible prev-
alence for pedophilic disorder in the male population is approximately 3%–5%. The pop-
ulation prevalence of pedophilic disorder in females is even more  uncertain, but it is likely
a small fraction of the prevalence in males.
Pedophilic Disorder 699
Development and Course
Adult males with pedophilic disorder may indi cate that they become aware of strong or
preferential sexual interest in children arou nd the time of puberty—the same time frame
in which males who later prefer physically ma ture partners became aware of their sexual
interest in women or men. Attempting to diag nose pedophilic disorder at the age at which
it first manifests is problematic because of th e difficulty during adolescent development in
differentiating it from age-appropriate sexual interest in peers or from sexual curiosity.
Hence, Criterion C requires for diagnosis a minimum age of 16 years and at least 5 years
older than the child or children in Criterion A.
Pedophilia per se appears to be a lifelong condition. Pedophilic disorder, however,
necessarily includes other elements that may change over time with or without treatment:
subjective distress (e.g., guilt, shame, intense se xual frustration, or feelings of isolation) or
psychosocial impairment, or the propensity to  act out sexually with children, or both.
Therefore, the course of pedophilic disorder may fluctuate, in crease, or decr ease with age.
Adults with pedophilic disorder may report an awareness of sexual interest in children
that preceded engaging in sexual behavior invo lving children or self-identification as a pedo-
phile. Advanced age is as likely to similarly di minish the frequency of sexual behavior involv-
ing children as it does other paraphilically  motivated and normophilic sexual behavior.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. There appears to be an interaction between pedophilia and antisocial-
ity, such that males with both traits are more  likely to act out sexually with children. Thus,
antisocial personality disorder may be consid ered a risk factor for pedophilic disorder in
males with pedophilia. 
Environmental. Adult males with pedophilia often repo rt that they were sexually abused
as children. It is unclear, however, whether this correlation reflects a causal influence of
childhood sexual abuse on adult pedophilia.
Genetic and physiological. Since pedophilia is a necessary condition for pedophilic dis-
order, any factor that increase s the probability of pedophilia al so increases the risk of pe-
dophilic disorder. There is some  evidence that neurodevelopme ntal perturbation in utero
increases the probability of develo pment of a pedoph ilic interest.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Psychophysiological laboratory measures of sexu al interest, which are sometimes useful in di-
agnosing pedophilic disorder in males, are not necessarily useful in diagnosing this disorder in
females, even when an identical procedure (e.g., viewing time) or anal ogous procedures (e.g.,
penile plethysmography and vaginal photoplethysmography) are available.
Diagnostic Markers
Psychophysiological measures of sexual interest  may sometimes be useful when an indi-
vidual’s history suggests the possible presence  of pedophilic disorder but the individual
denies strong or preferential  attraction to children. The most thoroughly researched and
longest used of such measures is penile plethysmography, although the sensitivity and spec-
ificity of diagnosis may vary from one site to another. Viewing time,  using photographs of
nude or minimally clothed person s as visual stimuli, is also used to diagnose pedophilic
disorder, especially in combination with self-report measures. Mental health professionals
in the United States, however, should be aware that possession of such visual stimuli, even
for diagnostic purposes, may violate American  law regarding possession of child pornog-
raphy and leave the mental health professio nal susceptible to criminal prosecution.
700 Paraphilic Disorders
Differential Diagnosis
Many of the conditions that could be differ ential diagnoses for pedophilic disorder also
sometimes occur as comorbid diagnoses. It is th erefore generally necessary to evaluate the
evidence for pedophilic disord er and other possible condit ions as separate questions.
Antisocial personality disorder. This disorder increases the li kelihood that a person who
is primarily attracted to the mature physique will approach a child, on one or a few occa-
sions, on the basis of relative availability. The individual often shows other signs of this
personality disorder, such as recurrent law-breaking.
Alcohol and substance use disorders. The disinhibiting effects of intoxication may also
increase the likelihood that a person who is primarily attracted to th e mature physique will
sexually approach a child.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder. There are occasional individuals who complain about
ego-dystonic thoughts and worries about possi ble attraction to children. Clinical inter-
viewing usually reveals an absence of sexual thoughts about children during high states of
sexual arousal (e.g., approaching orgasm during masturbation) and sometimes additional
ego-dystonic, intrusive se xual ideas (e.g., concerns about homosexuality).
Comorbidity
Psychiatric comorbidity of pedophilic disorder includes substance use disorders; depres-
sive, bipolar, and anxiety disorders; antisocial personality disorder; and other paraphilic
disorders. However, findings on comorbid disorders are largely among individuals con-
victed for sexual offenses involving childre n (almost all males) and may not be general-
izable to other individuals wi th pedophilic disorder (e.g., individuals who have never
approached a child sexually but who qualify for the diagnosis of pedophilic disorder on
the basis of subjective distress).
Fetishistic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 302.81 (F65.0)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recu rrent and intense sexual arousal from either
the use of nonliving objects or a highly specific focus on nongenital body part(s), as
manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The fetish objects are not limited to articles of clothing used in cross-dressing (as in
transvestic disorder) or devices specifical ly designed for the purpose of tactile genital
stimulation (e.g., vibrator).
Specify:
Body part(s)
Nonliving object(s)
Other
Specify if:
In a controlled environment:  This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living
in institutional or other settings where opportunities to engage in fetishistic behaviors
are restricted.
In full remission:  There has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other areas of functioning for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.
Fetishistic Disorder 701
Specifiers
Although individuals with fetishistic disord er may report intens e and recurrent sexual
arousal to inanimate objects or a specific body part, it is not unusual for non–mutually ex-
clusive combinations of fetishes  to occur. Thus, an individual may have fetishistic disorder
associated with an inanimate object (e.g., fe male undergarments) or an exclusive focus on
an intensely eroticized body part (e.g., feet, ha ir), or their fetishisti c interest may meet cri-
teria for various combinations of these specifiers (e.g., socks, shoes and feet).
Diagnostic Features
The paraphilic focus of fetishistic disorder involves the persistent and repetitive use of or de-
pendence on nonliving objects or a highly specif ic focus on a (typically nongenital) body part
as primary elements associated with sexual arous al (Criterion A). A diagnosis of fetishistic dis-
order must include clinically significant pers onal distress or psycho social role impairment
(Criterion B). Common fetish objects include female undergarments, male or female footwear,
rubber articles, leather cl othing, or other wearing apparel. Hi ghly eroticized body parts asso-
ciated with fetishistic disorder include feet, toes, and hair. It is not uncommon for sexualized
fetishes to include both inanimate objects and bo dy parts (e.g., dirty socks and feet), and for
this reason the definition of feti shistic disorder now re-incorporates partialism (i.e., an exclusive
focus on a body part) into its boundaries. Part ialism, previously considered a paraphilia not
otherwise specified disorder, ha d historically been subsumed in fetishism prior to DSM-III.
Many individuals who self-identify as fetish ist practitioners do not necessarily report
clinical impairment in association with their fetish-associated behavi ors. Such individuals
could be considered as having a fetish but not fetishistic diso rder. A diagnosis of fetishistic
disorder requires concurrent fulfillment of both the behaviors in Criterion A and the clin-
ically significant distress or impairment in functioning noted in Criterion B.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Fetishistic disorder can be a multisensory ex perience, including holding, tasting, rubbing,
inserting, or smelling the fetish object while ma sturbating, or preferring that a sexual part-
ner wear or utilize a fetish object during sexual encounters. Some individuals may acquire
extensive collections of high ly desired fetish objects.
Development and Course 
Usually paraphilias have an onset during pube rty, but fetishes can develop prior to ado-
lescence. Once established, fetish istic disorder tends to have a continuous course that fluc-
tuates in intensity and freq uency of urges or behavior. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Knowledge of and appropriate consideration fo r normative aspects of sexual behavior are
important factors to explore to establish a clinical diagnosis of fetishistic disorder and to
distinguish a clinical diagnosis from a socially acceptable sexual behavior.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Fetishistic disorder has not been systematically reported to occur in females. In clinical
samples, fetishistic disorder is ne arly exclusively re ported in males.
Functional Consequences of Fetishistic Disorder
Typical impairments associated with fetishistic disorder include sexual dysfunction
during romantic reciprocal rela tionships when the preferred fe tish object or body part is
702 Paraphilic Disorders
unavailable during foreplay or  coitus. Some individuals with  fetishistic disorder may pre-
fer solitary sexual activity as sociated with their fetishistic preference (s) even while in-
volved in a meaningful reciprocal and affectionate relationship.
Although fetishistic disorder is relatively  uncommon among arrested sexual offenders
with paraphilias, males with fe tishistic disorder may steal an d collect their particular fe-
tishistic objects of desire. Such individuals have been arrested and charged for nonsexual
antisocial behaviors (e.g., breaking and enteri ng, theft, burglary) that are primarily moti-
vated by the fetishistic disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Transvestic disorder. The nearest diagnostic neighbor of  fetishistic diso rder is transves-
tic disorder. As noted in the diagnostic criter ia, fetishistic disorder is not diagnosed when
fetish objects are limited to ar ticles of clothing exclusively worn during cross-dressing (as
in transvestic disorder), or when the object is genitally stimulating because it has been de-
signed for that purpose (e.g., a vibrator). 
Sexual masochism disorder or  other paraphilic disorders. Fetishes can co-occur with
other paraphilic disorders, especially “sad omasochism” and transvestic disorder. When
an individual fantasizes about or engages in “forced cross-dressing” and is primarily sex-
ually aroused by the domination or humiliation  associated with such fantasy or repetitive
activity, the diagnosis of sexual ma sochism disorder should be made.
Fetishistic behavior with out fetishistic disorder. Use of a fetish object for sexual arousal
without any associated distress or psychosoci al role impairment or  other adverse conse-
quence would not meet criteria for fetishisti c disorder, as the threshold required by Crite-
rion B would not be met. For example, an indi vidual whose sexual partner either shares or
can successfully incorporate his interest in caressing, smelling, or licking feet or toes as an
important element of foreplay would not be  diagnosed with fetishistic disorder; nor
would an individual who prefers, and is not di stressed or impaired by, solitary sexual be-
havior associated with wearing rubber garments or leather boots.
Comorbidity
Fetishistic disorder may co-occur with othe r paraphilic disorders as well as hypersexual-
ity. Rarely, fetishistic disorder may be associated with neurological conditions.
Transvestic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 302.3 (F65.1)
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, recurrent and intense sexual arousal from cross-
dressing, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors.
B. The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify if:
With fetishism: If sexually aroused by fabrics, materials, or garments.
With autogynephilia:  If sexually aroused by thoughts or images of self as female.
Specify if:
In a controlled environment:  This specifier is primarily applicable to individuals living
in institutional or other settings where opportunities to cross-dress are restricted.
In full remission:  There has been no distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other areas of functioning for at least 5 years while in an uncontrolled environment.
Transvestic Disorder 703
Specifiers
The presence of fetishism decreases the likelih ood of gender dysphoria in men with trans-
vestic disorder. The presence of autogynephilia increases the likelihood of gender dyspho-
ria in men with transvestic disorder. 
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of transvestic diso rder does not apply to all individuals who dress as the op-
posite sex, even those who do so habitually. It applies to individuals whose cross-dressing
or thoughts of cross-dressing are always or of ten accompanied by sexual excitement (Cri-
terion A) and who are emotionally distressed by this pattern or feel it impairs social or in-
terpersonal functioning (Crite rion B). The cross-dressing may involve only one or two
articles of clothing (e.g., for men, it may pertain only to women’s undergarments), or it
may involve dressing completely in the inner and outer garments of the other sex and (in
men) may include the use of women’s wigs and make-up. Transvestic disorder is nearly
exclusively reported in males. Sexual arousal, in its most obvious form of penile erection,
may co-occur with cross-dressing in various wa ys. In younger males, cross-dressing often
leads to masturbation, following which any fe male clothing is removed. Older males often
learn to avoid masturbating or doing anything to stimulate the penis so that the avoidance
of ejaculation allows them to prolong their cr oss-dressing session. Males with female part-
ners sometimes complete a cro ss-dressing session by having intercourse with their part-
ners, and some have difficult y maintaining a sufficient erec tion for intercourse without
cross-dressing (or private fantasies of cross-dressing).
Clinical assessment of distress or impairme nt, like clinical assessment of transvestic
sexual arousal, is usually dependent on the in dividual’s self-report. The pattern of behav-
ior “purging and acquisition” often signifies the presence of  distress in individuals with
transvestic disorder. During this behavioral pattern, an individual (usually a man) who
has spent a great deal of money on women’s clothes and other apparel (e.g., shoes, wigs)
discards the items (i.e., purges  them) in an effort to overc ome urges to cross-dress, and
then begins acquiring a woman’s wardrobe all over again.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Transvestic disorder in men is often accompanied by autogynephilia  (i.e., a male’s para-
philic tendency to be sexually aroused by th e thought or image of himself as a woman).
Autogynephilic fantasies and behaviors may focu s on the idea of exhibiting female phys-
iological functions (e.g., lactat ion, menstruation), engaging in stereotypically feminine be-
havior (e.g., knitting), or posses sing female anatomy (e.g., breasts).
Prevalence
The prevalence of transvestic di sorder is unknown. Transvesti c disorder is rare in males
and extremely rare in females.  Fewer than 3% of males repo rt having ever been sexually
aroused by dressing in women’s attire. The percentage of individuals who have cross-
dressed with sexual arousal more than once or  a few times in their lifetimes would be even
lower. The majority of males with transvesti c disorder identify as heterosexual, although
some individuals have occasional sexual in teraction with other males, especially when
they are cross-dressed. 
Development and Course
In males, the first signs of transvestic disorder may begin in childhood, in the form of
strong fascination with a particular item of women’s attire. Prior to  puberty, cross-dress-
ing produces generalized feelings of pleasura ble excitement. With the arrival of puberty,
dressing in women’s clothes begins to elicit pe nile erection and, in some cases, leads di-
704 Paraphilic Disorders
rectly to first ejaculation. In many cases, cross-dressing elicits less and less sexual ex-
citement as the individual grows older; eventually it may produce no discernible penile
response at all. The desire to cross-dress, at  the same time, remains the same or grows even
stronger. Individuals who report such a dimi nution of sexual response typically report
that the sexual excitement of cross-dressing has been replaced by feelings of comfort or
well-being.
In some cases, the course of transvestic disorder is contin uous, and in others it is epi-
sodic. It is not rare for men with transvestic d isorder to lose interest  in cross-dressing when
they first fall in love with a woman and be gin a relationship, but such abatement usually
proves temporary. When the desire to cross-dr ess returns, so does the associated distress.
Some cases of transvestic disorder progress  to gender dysphoria. The males in these
cases, who may be indistinguishable from othe rs with transvestic disorder in adolescence
or early childhood, gradually develop desires to remain in the female role for longer pe-
riods and to feminize their anatomy. The de velopment of gender dysphoria is usually ac-
companied by a (self-reported) reduction or e limination of sexual arousal in association
with cross-dressing.
The manifestation of transvestism in penile erection and stimulation, like the manifesta-
tion of other paraphilic as well as normophilic sexual interests, is most intense in adolescence
and early adulthood. The severity of transvestic disorder is highest in adulthood, when the
transvestic drives are most likely to conflict  with performance in he terosexual intercourse
and desires to marry and start a family. Middle -age and older men with a history of trans-
vestism are less likely to present with transvestic disorder  than with gender dysphoria.
Functional Consequences of Transvestic Disorder
Engaging in transvestic behaviors can interfer e with, or detract from, heterosexual rela-
tionships. This can be a source of distress to  men who wish to maintain conventional mar-
riages or romantic partnerships with women.
Differential Diagnosis
Fetishistic disorder. This disorder may resemble transv estic disorder, in particular, in
men with fetishism who put on women’s unde rgarments while masturbating with them.
Distinguishing transvestic disorder depends on  the individual’s specific thoughts during
such activity (e.g., are there any ideas of be ing a woman, being like a woman, or being
dressed as a woman?) and on the presence of othe r fetishes (e.g., soft, silky fabrics, whether
these are used for garments or for something else). 
Gender dysphoria. Individuals with transvestic disorder do not report an incongruence be-
tween their experienced gender and assigned gender nor a desire to be of the other gender; and
they typically do not have a history of chil dhood cross-gender behaviors, which would be
present in individuals with gender dysphoria. Individuals with a presentation that meets full
criteria for transvestic disorder as well as ge nder dysphoria should be given both diagnoses.
Comorbidity
Transvestism (and thus transvestic disorder) is often found in associ ation with other para-
philias. The most frequently co-occurring paraphilias are fetishism and masochism. One
particularly dangerous form of masochism, autoerotic asphyxia,  is associated with transves-
tism in a substantial proportion of fatal cases. 
Other Specified Paraphilic Disorder 705
Other Specified Paraphilic Disorder
302.89 (F65.89)
This category applies to presentations in whic h symptoms characteristic of a paraphilic disor-
der that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other im-
portant areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders
in the paraphilic disorders diagnostic class. The other specified paraphilic disorder category is
used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the
presentation does not meet the cr iteria for any specific paraphilic  disorder. This is done by re-
cording “other specified paraphilic  disorder” followed by the spec ific reason (e.g., “zoophilia”). 
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include, but are not limited to, recurrent and intense sexual arousal involving telephone
scatologia  (obscene phone calls), necrophilia  (corpses), zoophilia  (animals), coprophilia
(feces), klismaphilia  (enemas), or urophilia  (urine) that has been present for at least 6 months
and causes marked distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important ar-
eas of functioning. Other specified paraphilic disorder can be specified as in remission
and/or as occurring in a controlled environment.
Unspecified Paraphilic Disorder
302.9 (F65.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a paraphilic
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the paraphilic disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified paraphilic dis-
order category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not  to specify the reason
that the criteria are not met for a specific  paraphilic disorder, and includes presentations
in which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis.
This page intentionally left blank 