645Personality
 Disorders
This chapter begins  with a general definition of personality disorder that applies
to each of the 10 specific  personality disorders. A personality disorder  is an enduring pattern
of inner experience and behavior  that deviates markedly from the expectations of the in-
dividual’s culture, is pervasive and inflexible , has an onset in adolescence or early adult-
hood, is stable over time, and lead s to distress or impairment. 
With any ongoing review process, especially  one of this complexity, different view-
points emerge, and an effort was made to accommodate them. Thus, personality disorders
are included in both Sections II and III. The material in Section II represents an update of
text associated with the same criteria foun d in DSM-IV-TR, whereas Section III includes
the proposed research model for personality disorder diagnosis and conceptualization de-
veloped by the DSM-5 Personality and Persona lity Disorders Work Group. As this field
evolves, it is hoped that both versions will serve clinical practice and research initiatives,
respectively.
The following personality disorders are included in this chapter.
•Paranoid personality disorder  is a pattern of distrust and suspiciousness such that oth-
ers’ motives are interp reted as malevolent.
•Schizoid personality disorder  is a pattern of detachment fr om social relationships and
a restricted range of emotional expression.
•Schizotypal personality disorder  is a pattern of acute discomfort in close relationships,
cognitive or perceptual distortions,  and eccentricities of behavior.
•Antisocial personality disorder  is a pattern of disregard for,  and violation of, the rights
of others.
•Borderline personality disorder  is a pattern of instability in interpersonal relation-
ships, self-image, and affects, and marked impulsivity.
•Histrionic personality disorder  is a pattern of excessive emotionality and attention
seeking.
•Narcissistic personality disorder  is a pattern of grandiosity, need for admiration, and
lack of empathy.
•Avoidant personality disorder  is a pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy,
and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation.
•Dependent personality disorder is a pattern of submissive and clinging behavior re-
lated to an excessive need  to be taken care of.
•Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder  is a pattern of preoccupation with order-
liness, perfectionism, and control.
•Personality change due to another medical condition  is a persistent personality dis-
turbance that is judged to be due to the direct physiological effects of a medical condi-
tion (e.g., frontal lobe lesion).
•Other specified personality disorder and unspecified personality disorder  is a cate-
gory provided for two situations: 1) the individual’s personality pattern meets the gen-
eral criteria for a personality disorder, an d traits of several different personality
disorders are present, but the criteria for any specific pers onality disorder  are not met;
646 Personality Disorders
or 2) the individual’s personality pattern m eets the general criteria  for a personality dis-
order, but the individual is considered to have a personality disorder that is not in-
cluded in the DSM-5 classification (e.g., passive-aggressive personality disorder).
The personality disorders are grouped into thre e clusters based on descriptive similarities.
Cluster A includes paranoid, schizoid, and schi zotypal personality diso rders. Individuals with
these disorders often appear odd or eccentric. Cluster B includes antisocial, borderline, histri-
onic, and narcissistic personality disorders. In dividuals with these disorders often appear dra-
matic, emotional, or erratic. Cluster C in cludes avoidant, dependent, and obsessive-
compulsive personality disorders. Individuals with these disorders often appear anxious or
fearful. It should be noted that this clustering system, although useful in some research and ed-
ucational situations, has serious limitations and has not been consistently validated. 
Moreover, individuals freque ntly present with co-occu rring personality disorders
from different clusters. Prevalence estimates fo r the different clusters suggest 5.7% for dis-
orders in Cluster A, 1.5% for disorders in Cl uster B, 6.0% for disorders in Cluster C, and
9.1% for any personality disorder, indicating frequent co-occurrence of disorders from dif-
ferent clusters. Data from the 2001–2002 National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and
Related Conditions suggest that  approximately 15% of U.S. adults have at least one per-
sonality disorder.
Dimensional Models for Personality Disorders
The diagnostic approach used in this manual  represents the categorical perspective that
personality disorders are qualit atively distinct clinical synd romes. An alternative to the
categorical approach is the dimensional perspective that personality disorders represent
maladaptive variants of personality traits that merge imperceptibly into normality and
into one another. See Section III for a full description of a dimensional model for person-
ality disorders. The DSM-IV personality disord er clusters (i.e., odd-eccentric, dramatic-
emotional, and anxious- fearful) may also be viewed as dimensions representing spectra of
personality dysfunction on a continuum with other mental disorders. The alternative di-
mensional models have much in common and together appear to cover the important ar-
eas of personality dysfunction. Their integration, clinical utility, and relationship with the
personality disorder diagnostic categories and various aspects of personality dysfunction
are under active investigation.
General Personality Disorder
Criteria
A. An enduring pattern of inner experience and behavior that deviates markedly from the
expectations of the individual’s culture. This pattern is manifested in two (or more) of
the following areas:
1. Cognition (i.e., ways of perceiving and interpreting self, other people, and events).
2. Affectivity (i.e., the range, intensity, lability, and appropriateness of emotional re-
sponse).
3. Interpersonal functioning.
4. Impulse control.
B. The enduring pattern is inflexible and per vasive across a broad range of personal and
social situations.
C. The enduring pattern leads to clinically signi ficant distress or impairment in social, oc-
cupational, or other important areas of functioning.
General Personality Disorder 647
D. The pattern is stable and of long duration, and its onset can be traced back at least to
adolescence or early adulthood.
E. The enduring pattern is not better explained as a manifestation or consequence of an-
other mental disorder.
F. The enduring pattern is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
a drug of abuse, a medication) or another  medical condition (e.g., head trauma).
Diagnostic Features
Personality traits  are enduring patterns of perceiving, relating to, and thinking about the en-
vironment and oneself that are exhibited in a wide range of social and personal contexts.
Only when personality traits are inflexible and maladaptive and cause significant func-
tional impairment or subjective distress do th ey constitute personality disorders. The essen-
tial feature of a personality disorder is an en during pattern of inner experience and behavior
that deviates markedly from the expectations of the individual’s culture and is manifested
in at least two of the following areas: cognition, affectivity, interpersonal functioning, or im-
pulse control (Criterion A). This  enduring pattern is inflexib le and pervasive across a broad
range of personal and social sit uations (Criterion B) and leads to clinically significant dis-
tress or impairment in social, occupational, or  other important areas of functioning (Crite-
rion C). The pattern is stable and of long duration, and its onset can be traced back at least
to adolescence or early adulthood (Criterion D). The pattern is not better explained as a
manifestation or consequence of another mental disorder (Criterion E) and is not attribut-
able to the physiological effects of a substanc e (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, exposure
to a toxin) or another medical condition (e.g., head trauma) (Criterion F). Specific diagnostic
criteria are also provided for each of the pe rsonality disorders included in this chapter. 
The diagnosis of personality disorders requires an evaluation of the individual’s long-
term patterns of functioning, and the partic ular personality features must be evident by
early adulthood. The personality traits that define these disorders must also be distin-
guished from characteristics th at emerge in response to sp ecific situational stressors or
more transient mental states (e .g., bipolar, depressive, or an xiety disorders; substance in-
toxication). The clinician should assess the stability of pers onality traits over time and
across different situations. Although a single interview with the in dividual is sometimes
sufficient for making the diagnosis, it is of ten necessary to conduct more than one inter-
view and to space these over time. Assessment ca n also be complicated by the fact that the
characteristics that define a personality di sorder may not be considered problematic by
the individual (i.e., the traits are often ego-sy ntonic). To help overcome this difficulty, sup-
plementary information from other informants may be helpful.
Development and Course
The features of a personality disorder usually become recogn izable during adolescence or
early adult life. By definition, a personality disorder is an enduring pattern of thinking,
feeling, and behaving that is relatively stable  over time. Some types of personality disorder
(notably, antisocial and borderli ne personality disorders) tend to become less evident or to
remit with age, whereas this appears to be less true for some other types (e.g., obsessive-
compulsive and schizotypal personality disorders).
Personality disorder categories may be app lied with children or adolescents in those
relatively unusual instances in which the individual’s particular maladaptive personality
traits appear to be pervasive, persistent, an d unlikely to be limited to a particular devel-
opmental stage or another mental disorder. It sh ould be recognized that the traits of a per-
sonality disorder that appear in childhood will often not persist unchanged into adult life.
For a personality disorder to be diagnosed in an individual younger than 18 years, the fea-
tures must have been present fo r at least 1 year. The one exception to this is antisocial per-
648 Personality Disorders
sonality disorder, which cannot be diagnosed in individuals younger than 18 years. Al-
though, by definition, a personality disorder requires an onset no later than early
adulthood, individuals may not come to clinical attention until relatively late in life. A per-
sonality disorder may be exacer bated following the loss of significant supporting persons
(e.g., a spouse) or previously stabilizing social situations (e.g ., a job). However, the devel-
opment of a change in person ality in middle adulthood or later life warrants a thorough
evaluation to determine the possible presence of a personality change due to another med-
ical condition or an unrecogn ized substance use disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Judgments about personality functioning must take into account the in dividual’s ethnic, cul-
tural, and social background. Personality disord ers should not be confused with problems as-
sociated with acculturation following immigratio n or with the expressi on of habits, customs,
or religious and political values professed by the individual’s culture of origin. It is useful for
the clinician, especially when evaluating some one from a different background, to obtain ad-
ditional information from informants who are fa miliar with the person’s cultural background.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Certain personality disorders (e.g., antisocial personality disorder) are diagnosed more
frequently in males. Others (e.g., borderline, histrionic, and dependent personality disor-
ders) are diagnosed more freque ntly in females. Although these differences in prevalence
probably reflect real gender differences in the presence of such patterns, clinicians must be
cautious not to overdiagnose or underdiagnos e certain personality disorders in females or
in males because of social stereotypes about typical gender roles and behaviors.
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders and personality traits. Many of the specific criteria for the per-
sonality disorders describe features (e.g., su spiciousness, dependency, insensitivity) that
are also characteristic of episo des of other mental disorders. A personality disorder should
be diagnosed only when the defining characte ristics appeared before  early adulthood, are
typical of the individual’s long-term function ing, and do not occur exclusively during an
episode of another mental diso rder. It may be particularly difficult (and not particularly
useful) to distinguish personality disorders from persistent mental disorders such as per-
sistent depressive disorder that have an ea rly onset and an enduring, relatively stable
course. Some personality diso rders may have a “spectrum” relationship to other mental
disorders (e.g., schizotypal personality disord er with schizophrenia; avoidant personality
disorder with social anxiety disorder [social phobia]) based on phe nomenological or bio-
logical similarities or familial aggregation.
Personality disorders must be distinguished from personality traits that do not reach
the threshold for a personality disorder. Person ality traits are diagnosed as a personality
disorder only when they are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant
functional impairment or subjective distress.
Psychotic disorders. For the three personality disorders that may be related to the psy-
chotic disorders (i.e., paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal), there is an exclusion criterion
stating that the pattern of behavior must no t have occurred exclusively during the course
of schizophrenia, a bipolar or depressive disorder with psycho tic features, or another psy-
chotic disorder. When an individual has a pers istent mental disorder  (e.g., schizophrenia)
that was preceded by a preexisting personalit y disorder, the personality disorder should
also be recorded, followed by “premorbid” in parentheses.
Anxiety and depressive disorders. The clinician must be cautious in diagnosing per-
sonality disorders during an episode of a depressive disorder or an  anxiety disorder, be-
Paranoid Personality Disorder 649
cause these conditions may have cross-sectio nal symptom features that mimic personality
traits and may make it more difficult to evaluate retrospectively the individual’s long-term
patterns of functioning. 
Posttraumatic stress disorder. When personality changes emerge and persist after an
individual has been exposed to  extreme stress, a diagnosis of  posttraumatic stress disorder
should be considered. 
Substance use disorders. When an individual has a substance use disorder, it is impor-
tant not to make a personality disorder diag nosis based solely on behaviors that are con-
sequences of substance intoxication or withdraw al or that are associated with activities in
the service of sustaining substance use (e.g., antisocial behavior). 
Personality change due to another medical condition. When enduring changes in per-
sonality arise as a result of the physiological effects of another medical condition (e.g.,
brain tumor), a diagnosis of personality chan ge due to another medical condition should
be considered.
Cluster A Personality Disorders
Paranoid Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.0 (F60.0)
A. A pervasive distrust and suspiciousness of others such that their motives are inter-
preted as malevolent, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of con-
texts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following:
1. Suspects, without sufficient basis, that others are exploiting, harming, or deceiving
him or her.
2. Is preoccupied with unjustified doubts about the loyalty or trustworthiness of friends
or associates.
3. Is reluctant to confide in others because of unwarranted fear that the information
will be used maliciously against him or her.
4. Reads hidden demeaning or threatening meanings into benign remarks or events.
5. Persistently bears grudges (i.e., is unforgiving of insults, injuries, or slights).
6. Perceives attacks on his or her character or reputation that are not apparent to oth-
ers and is quick to react angrily or to counterattack.
7. Has recurrent suspicions, without justification, regarding fidelity of spouse or sexual
partner.
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or
depressive disorder with psychotic features, or another psychotic disorder and is not
attributable to the physiological effects of another medical condition.
Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” i.e., “paranoid
personality disorder (premorbid).”
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of parano id personality disorder is a pattern of pervasive distrust
and suspiciousness of others such that their motives are interpreted as malevolent. This
pattern begins by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
650 Personality Disorders
Individuals with this disorder assume that other people will exploit, harm, or deceive
them, even if no evidence exists to support th is expectation (Criterion A1). They suspect on
the basis of little or no eviden ce that others are plotting against them and may attack them
suddenly, at any time and without reason. They often feel that they have been deeply and
irreversibly injured by another person or persons even when there is no objective evidence
for this. They are preoccupied with unjustifie d doubts about the loyalty or trustworthiness
of their friends and associates, whose actions are minutely scrutinize d for evidence of hos-
tile intentions (Criterion A2). Any perceived deviation from trustworthiness or loyalty
serves to support their underlying assumptions. They are so amazed when a friend or as-
sociate shows loyalty that they cannot trust or believe it. If they get into trouble, they ex-
pect that friends and associates w ill either attack or ignore them.
Individuals with paranoid personality disord er are reluctant to confide in or become
close to others because they fear that the information they share will be used against them
(Criterion A3). They may refuse to answer personal questions, saying that the information
is “nobody’s business.” They read hidden meanings that are demeaning and threatening
into benign remarks or events (Criterion A4). For example, an individual with this disor-
der may misinterpret an honest mistake by a store clerk as a deliberate attempt to short-
change, or view a casual humorous remark by  a co-worker as a seri ous character attack.
Compliments are often misinterpreted (e.g.,  a compliment on a new acquisition is mis-
interpreted as a criticism for selfishness; a compliment on an accomplishment is misinter-
preted as an attempt to coerce more and better performance). They may view an offer of
help as a criticism that they ar e not doing well enough on their own.
Individuals with this disorder persistently bear grudges and are unwilling to forgive
the insults, injuries, or slights that they th ink they have received (Criterion A5). Minor
slights arouse major hostility, and the hostile f eelings persist for a long time. Because they
are constantly vigilant to the harmful intentions of others, they very often feel that their
character or reputation has been attacked or that they have been slighted in some other
way. They are quick to counterattack and react with anger to perceived insults (Criterion
A6). Individuals with this disorder may be pathologically jealous, often suspecting that
their spouse or sexual partner is unfaithful without any adequate ju stification (Criterion
A7). They may gather trivial and circumstantial  “evidence” to support  their jealous beliefs.
They want to maintain complete control of intimate relationships to avoid being betrayed
and may constantly question and challenge th e whereabouts, actions, intentions, and fi-
delity of their spouse or partner.
Paranoid personality disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior oc-
curs exclusively during the course of schizo phrenia, a bipolar disorder or depressive dis-
order with psychotic features, or another psychoti c disorder, or if it is attributable to the
physiological effects of a neurological (e.g., temporal lobe epilepsy) or another medical
condition (Criterion B).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with paranoid personality disorder are generally difficult to get along with
and often have problems with close relationsh ips. Their excessive suspiciousness and hos-
tility may be expressed in over t argumentativeness, in recurr ent complaining, or by quiet,
apparently hostile aloofness. Because they ar e hypervigilant for potential threats, they
may act in a guarded, secretive, or devious manner and appear to be “cold” and lacking in
tender feelings. Although they may appear to be objective, rational , and unemotional, they
more often display a labile range of affect, with hostile, stub born, and sarcastic expressions
predominating. Their combative and suspicious  nature may elicit a hostile response in
others, which then serves to conf irm their original expectations.
Because individuals with  paranoid personality disorder lack trust in others, they have
an excessive need to be self-sufficient and a strong sense of autonomy. They also need to
Paranoid Personality Disorder 651
have a high degree of control over those around them. They are often rigid, critical of oth-
ers, and unable to collaborate, although they  have great difficulty accepting criticism them-
selves. They may blame others for their own shortcomings. Because of their quickness to
counterattack in response to the threats they perceive around them, they may be litigious
and frequently become involved in legal disputes. Individuals with this disorder seek to
confirm their preconceived nega tive notions regarding people or situations they encounter,
attributing malevolent motivati ons to others that are projections of their own fears. They
may exhibit thinly hidden, unrealistic grandios e fantasies, are often attuned to issues of
power and rank, and tend to develop negative  stereotypes of others, particularly those
from population groups distinct from their own. Attracted by simplistic formulations of the
world, they are often wary of  ambiguous situations. They ma y be perceived as “fanatics”
and form tightly knit “cults” or  groups with others who share their paranoid belief systems.
Particularly in response to stress, individu als with this disorder may experience very
brief psychotic episodes (lasting minutes to hour s). In some instances, paranoid personal-
ity disorder may appear as the premorbid ante cedent of delusional disorder or schizo-
phrenia. Individuals with paranoid personal ity disorder may deve lop major depressive
disorder and may be at increased risk fo r agoraphobia and obsessive-compulsive dis-
order. Alcohol and other substance use disord ers frequently occur. The most common co-
occurring personality disorders appear to be schizotypal, schizoid, narcissistic, avoidant,
and borderline.
Prevalence
A prevalence estimate for paranoid personality based on a probability subsample from
Part II of the National Comorbidity Survey Replication suggests a prevalence of 2.3%,
while the National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions data suggest
a prevalence of paranoid personality disorder of 4.4%.
Development and Course 
Paranoid personality disorder may be first apparent in childhood and adolescence with
solitariness, poor peer relationships, social anxiety, underachievement in school, hyper-
sensitivity, peculiar thoughts and language, and idiosyncratic fantasies. These children
may appear to be “odd” or “eccentric” and attr act teasing. In clinical samples, this disorder
appears to be more commonly diagnosed in males.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. There is some evidence for an increased prevalence of par-
anoid personality disorder in relatives of probands with schizophrenia and for a more spe-
cific familial relationship with delusional disorder, persecutory type.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Some behaviors that are influenced by sociocultural contexts or specific life circumstances
may be erroneously labeled paranoid and may ev en be reinforced by the process of clinical
evaluation. Members of minority groups, immi grants, political and economic refugees, or
individuals of different ethnic backgrounds may display guarded or defensive behaviors
because of unfamiliarity (e.g., language barriers or lack of knowledge of rules and regula-
tions) or in response to the perceived neglect or indifference of the majority society. These
behaviors can, in turn, generate anger and fr ustration in those who deal with these indi-
viduals, thus setting up a vicious cycle of mutual mistrust, which should not be confused
with paranoid personality diso rder. Some ethnic groups also display culturally related be-
haviors that can be misinterpreted as paranoid.
652 Personality Disorders
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms. Paranoid personality disorder can
be distinguished from delusional disorder, pe rsecutory type; schizophrenia; and a bipolar or
depressive disorder with psychotic features be cause these disorders are all characterized by a
period of persistent psychotic symptoms (e.g., delusions and hallucinations). For an additional
diagnosis of paranoid personality disorder to be given, the personal ity disorder must have
been present before the onset of psychotic sy mptoms and must persist when the psychotic
symptoms are in remission. When an individual has another persistent mental disorder (e.g.,
schizophrenia) that was preceded by paranoid personality disorder, paranoid personality dis-
order should also be recorded, follo wed by “premorbid” in parentheses.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Paranoid personality disorder
must be distinguished from personality ch ange due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge ar e attributable to the direct effects of another medical condi-
tion on the central nervous system. 
Substance use disorders. Paranoid personality disorder  must be distinguished from
symptoms that may develop in associat ion with persistent substance use. 
Paranoid traits associated with physical handicaps. The disorder must also be distin-
guished from paranoid traits associated with  the development of physical handicaps (e.g.,
a hearing impairment).
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may be
confused with paranoid person ality disorder because they ha ve certain features in common.
It is therefore important to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their
characteristic features. However, if an individu al has personality features that meet criteria
for one or more personality disorders in additi on to paranoid personality disorder, all can be
diagnosed. Paranoid personality disorder an d schizotypal personality disorder share the
traits of suspiciousness, interpersonal aloofne ss, and paranoid ideati on, but schizotypal per-
sonality disorder also includes symptoms such as magical thinking, unusual perceptual ex-
periences, and odd thinking and speech. Indivi duals with behaviors th at meet criteria for
schizoid personality disorder ar e often perceived as strange, ec centric, cold, and aloof, but
they do not usually have prominent paranoid ideation. The tendency of individuals with
paranoid personality disorder to react to minor stimuli with anger is also seen in borderline
and histrionic personality disorders. However, these disord ers are not necessarily associ-
ated with pervasive suspiciousness. People with avoidant personality disorder may also be
reluctant to confide in others, but more from fear of being embarrassed or found inadequate
than from fear of others’ malicious intent. Although antisocial behavior may be present in
some individuals with paranoid personality diso rder, it is not usually motivated by a desire
for personal gain or to exploit others as in an tisocial personality diso rder, but rather is more
often attributable to a desire for revenge. In dividuals with narcissistic personality disorder
may occasionally display suspiciousness, social withdrawal, or alienation, but this derives
primarily from fears of having thei r imperfections or flaws revealed. 
Paranoid traits may be adaptive, particul arly in threatening environments. Paranoid
personality disorder should be  diagnosed only when these tr aits are inflexible, maladap-
tive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or subjective distress.
Schizoid Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.20 (F60.1)
A. A pervasive pattern of detachment from social relationships and a restricted range of
expression of emotions in interpers onal settings, beginning by early adulthood and
present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the following:
Schizoid Personality Disorder 653
1. Neither desires nor enjoys close relationships, including being part of a family.
2. Almost always chooses solitary activities.
3. Has little, if any, interest in having sexual experiences with another person.
4. Takes pleasure in few, if any, activities.
5. Lacks close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives.
6. Appears indifferent to the praise or criticism of others.
7. Shows emotional coldness, detachment, or flattened affectivity.
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or
depressive disorder with psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or autism
spectrum disorder and is not attributable to the physiological effects of another medical
condition.
Note: If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” i.e., “schiz-
oid personality disorder (premorbid).”
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of schizo id personality disorder is a pe rvasive pattern of detachment
from social relationships and a restricted range of expression of emotions in interpersonal
settings. This pattern begins by early adulth ood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with schizoid personality disord er appear to lack a desire for intimacy,
seem indifferent to opportunities to develop close relationships, and do not seem to derive
much satisfaction from being part of a family or other social group (Criterion A1). They
prefer spending time by themselves, rather than being with other people. They often ap-
pear to be socially isolated or “loners” and al most always choose solitary activities or hob-
bies that do not include interaction with others (Criterion A2). They prefer mechanical or
abstract tasks, such as computer or mathemat ical games. They may have very little interest
in having sexual experiences with another person (Criterion A3) and take pleasure in few,
if any, activities (Criterion A4). There is usually a reduced experience of pleasure from sen-
sory, bodily, or interpersonal ex periences, such as walking on a beach at sunset or having
sex. These individuals have no  close friends or confidants, except possibly a first-degree
relative (Criterion A5).
Individuals with schizoid personality disord er often seem indifferent to the approval
or criticism of others and do not appear to be bothered by what others may think of them
(Criterion A6). They may be oblivious to the no rmal subtleties of social interaction and of-
ten do not respond appropriately to social cues so that they seem socially inept or super-
ficial and self-absorbed. They usually displa y a “bland” exterior without visible emotional
reactivity and rarely reciprocate gestures or facial expressions, such as smiles or nods (Cri-
terion A7). They claim that they rarely expe rience strong emotions such as anger and joy.
They often display a constricted affect and ap pear cold and aloof. However, in those very
unusual circumstances in which these indivi duals become at least temporarily comfort-
able in revealing themselves, they may ackn owledge having painful feelings, particularly
related to social interactions.
Schizoid personality disorder should not be diagnosed if th e pattern of behavior occurs
exclusively during the course of schizophrenia , a bipolar or depressive disorder with psy-
chotic features, another psychotic disorder, or au tism spectrum disorder, or if it is attrib-
utable to the physiological effects of a neurological (e.g., temporal lobe epilepsy) or another
medical condition (Criterion B).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with schizoid personality disord er may have particular difficulty expressing
anger, even in response to direct provocation, which contributes to  the impression that
654 Personality Disorders
they lack emotion. Their lives sometimes se em directionless, an d they may appear to
“drift” in their goals. Such individuals ofte n react passively to adverse circumstances and
have difficulty responding appropriately to im portant life events. Because of their lack of
social skills and lack of desire for sexual experiences, individuals with this disorder have
few friendships, date infreque ntly, and often do not marry. Occupational functioning may
be impaired, particularly if interpersonal involvement is required, but individuals with
this disorder may do well when they work un der conditions of soci al isolation. Particu-
larly in response to stress, individuals with this disorder may experience very brief psy-
chotic episodes (lasting minutes to hours) . In some instances, schizoid personality
disorder may appear as the pr emorbid antecedent of delusional disorder or schizophre-
nia. Individuals with this disorder may so metimes develop major depressive disorder.
Schizoid personality disorder most often co-occurs with schi zotypal, paranoid, and avoid-
ant personality disorders.
Prevalence
Schizoid personality disorder is uncommon in clinical settings. A prevalence estimate for
schizoid personality based on a probability su bsample from Part II of the National Co-
morbidity Survey Replication suggests a pr evalence of 4.9%. Data from the 2001–2002
National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions suggest a prevalence of
3.1%.
Development and Course
Schizoid personality disorder may be first apparent in childhood  and adolescence with
solitariness, poor peer relationships, and underachievement in school, which mark these
children or adolescents as different and make them subject to teasing.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Schizoid personality disorder may have increased preva-
lence in the relatives of individuals with schizophrenia or schizotypa l personality disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Individuals from a variety of cultural bac kgrounds sometimes exhibit defensive behaviors
and interpersonal styles that may be erroneously labeled as “schizoid.” For example, those
who have moved from rural to metropolitan  environments may react with “emotional
freezing” that may last for several months and manifest as solitary activities, constricted
affect, and other deficits in communication. Immigrants from other countries are some-
times mistakenly perceived as cold, hostile, or indifferent.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Schizoid personality disorder is diagnosed slightly more often in males and may cause
more impairment in them.
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms. Schizoid persona lity disorder can
be distinguished from delusional disorder, sc hizophrenia, and a bipolar or depressive dis-
order with psychotic features because these d isorders are all characterized by a period of
persistent psychotic symptoms (e .g., delusions and hallucinations). To give an additional
diagnosis of schizoid personality disorder, the personality disorder must have been present
before the onset of psychotic symptoms an d must persist when the psychotic symptoms
Schizotypal Personality Disorder 655
are in remission. When an individual has a pe rsistent psychotic diso rder (e.g., schizophre-
nia) that was preceded by schizoid person ality disorder, schizoid personality disorder
should also be recorded, followe d by “premorbid” in parentheses.
Autism spectrum disorder. There may be great difficulty di fferentiating individuals with
schizoid personality disorder from those with milder forms of autism spectrum disorder,
which may be differentiated by more severely  impaired social inte raction and stereotyped
behaviors and interests.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Schizoid personality disorder
must be distinguished from personality ch ange due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge ar e attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system. 
Substance use disorders. Schizoid personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in a ssociation with persistent substance use.
Other personality disorder s and personality traits. Other personality disorders may be
confused with schizoid personality disorder because they have certain features in com-
mon. It is, therefore, import ant to distinguish among these disorders based on differences
in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features that
meet criteria for one or  more personality disorders in addition to schizoid personality dis-
order, all can be diagnosed. Although characteri stics of social isolation and restricted af-
fectivity are common to schizoid, schizotypal, and paranoid personality disorders,
schizoid personality disorder can be distin guished from schizotypa l personality disorder
by the lack of cognitive and perceptual dist ortions and from paranoid personality disorder
by the lack of suspiciousness and paranoid ideation. The social isolation of schizoid per-
sonality disorder can be distinguished from th at of avoidant personality disorder, which is
attributable to fear of being embarrassed or  found inadequate and excessive anticipation
of rejection. In contrast, people with schizoid personality disorder have a more pervasive
detachment and limited desire for social in timacy. Individuals with obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder may also show an apparent social detachment stemming from devo-
tion to work and discomfort wi th emotions, but they do have  an underlying capacity for
intimacy.
Individuals who are “loners” may display pe rsonality traits that might be considered
schizoid. Only when these trai ts are inflexible and maladaptive and cause significant func-
tional impairment or subjective distress do they constitute schizoid personality disorder.
Schizotypal Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.22 (F21)
A. A pervasive pattern of social and interpersonal deficits marked by acute discomfort
with, and reduced capacity for, close relationships as well as by cognitive or perceptual
distortions and eccentricities of behavior, beginning by early adulthood and present in
a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
1. Ideas of reference (excluding delusions of reference).
2. Odd beliefs or magical thinking that influences behavior and is inconsistent with
subcultural norms (e.g., superstitiousness, belief in clairvoyance, telepathy, or
“sixth sense”; in children and adolescents,  bizarre fantasies or preoccupations).
3. Unusual perceptual experiences, including bodily illusions.
4. Odd thinking and speech (e.g., vague, circumstantial, metaphorical, overelaborate,
or stereotyped).
5. Suspiciousness or paranoid ideation.
656 Personality Disorders
6. Inappropriate or constricted affect.
7. Behavior or appearance that is odd, eccentric, or peculiar.
8. Lack of close friends or confidants other than first-degree relatives.
9. Excessive social anxiety that does not diminish with familiarity and tends to be as-
sociated with paranoid fears rather than negative judgments about self.
B. Does not occur exclusively during the course of schizophrenia, a bipolar disorder or
depressive disorder with psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or autism
spectrum disorder.
Note:  If criteria are met prior to the onset of schizophrenia, add “premorbid,” e.g., “schizo-
typal personality disorder (premorbid).”
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of schizo typal personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of social
and interpersonal deficits ma rked by acute discomfort with, and reduced capacity for,
close relationships as well as by cognitive or pe rceptual distortions and eccentricities of be-
havior. This pattern begins by early adulthoo d and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with schizotypal personality disord er often have ideas of reference (i.e., in-
correct interpretations of casual incidents and external events as having a particular and
unusual meaning specifically for the person ) (Criterion A1). Th ese should be distin-
guished from delusions of reference, in whic h the beliefs are held with delusional convic-
tion. These individuals may be superstitiou s or preoccupied with paranormal phenomena
that are outside the norms of their subculture (Criterion A2). They may feel that they have
special powers to sense events before they happen or to read others’ thoughts. They may
believe that they have magical control over  others, which can be implemented directly
(e.g., believing that their spouse’s taking the do g out for a walk is the direct result of think-
ing an hour earlier it should be done) or in directly through compli ance with magical rit-
uals (e.g., walking past a specific object three times to avoid a certain harmful outcome).
Perceptual alterations may be present (e.g., se nsing that another person is present or hear-
ing a voice murmuring his or her name) (Criterion A3). Their speech may include unusual
or idiosyncratic phrasing and construction. It is often loose, digressive, or vague, but with-
out actual derailment or incoherence (Criteri on A4). Responses can be either overly con-
crete or overly abstract, and words or conc epts are sometimes applied in unusual ways
(e.g., the individual may state that he  or she was not “talkable” at work).
Individuals with this disorder are often suspicious and may have paranoid ideation
(e.g., believing their colleagues at work ar e intent on undermining their reputation with
the boss) (Criterion A5). They are usually not able to negotiate the fu ll range of affects and
interpersonal cuing required fo r successful relationships and thus often appear to interact
with others in an inappropriate, stiff, or constricted fashion (Criterion A6). These individ-
uals are often considered to be odd or ecce ntric because of unusual mannerisms, an often
unkempt manner of dress that does not quite “fit together,” and inattention to the usual
social conventions (e.g., the in dividual may avoid eye contact, wear clothes that are ink
stained and ill-fitting, and be unable to join in the give-and-take banter of co-workers)
(Criterion A7).
Individuals with schizotypal personality di sorder experience in terpersonal related-
ness as problematic and are uncomfortable relating to other people. Although they may
express unhappiness about their lack of relationships, their behavior suggests a decreased
desire for intimate contacts. As a result, they  usually have no or few close friends or con-
fidants other than a first-degree relative (Cri terion A8). They are anxious in social situa-
tions, particularly those invo lving unfamiliar people (Crite rion A9). They will interact
with other individuals when they have to but prefer to keep to themselves because they
feel that they are different and just do not “fit  in.” Their social anxiety does not easily abate,
Schizotypal Personality Disorder 657
even when they spend more time in the setti ng or become more fa miliar with the other
people, because their anxiety tends to be assoc iated with suspiciousness regarding others’
motivations. For example, when attending a dinner party, the individual with schizotypal
personality disorder will not become more rela xed as time goes on, but rather may become
increasingly tense and suspicious.
Schizotypal personality disorder should not be diagnosed if the pattern of behavior oc-
curs exclusively during the course of schizo phrenia, a bipolar or de pressive disorder with
psychotic features, another psychotic disorder, or autism spectrum disorder (Criterion B).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with schizotypal personality diso rder often seek treatment for the associated
symptoms of anxiety or depression rather than for the personality disorder features per se.
Particularly in response to stress, individual s with this disorder may experience transient
psychotic episodes (lasting minutes to hours), although they usually are insufficient in du-
ration to warrant an additional diagnosis such  as brief psychotic disorder or schizophreni-
form disorder. In some cases, clinically sig nificant psychotic symptoms may develop that
meet criteria for brief psychotic disorder, sc hizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder,
or schizophrenia. Over half may have a hist ory of at least one ma jor depressive episode.
From 30% to 50% of individuals diagnosed with  this disorder have a concurrent diagnosis
of major depressive disorder when admitted to  a clinical setting. There is considerable co-
occurrence with schizoid, paranoid, avoi dant, and borderline personality disorders.
Prevalence
In community studies of schizotypal personality disorder, reported rates range from 0.6%
in Norwegian samples to 4.6% in a U.S. commu nity sample. The prevalence of schizotypal
personality disorder in clinical populations seems to be infrequent (0%–1.9%), with a
higher estimated prevalence in the general population (3.9%) found in the National Epi-
demiologic Survey on Alco hol and Related Conditions.
Development and Course
Schizotypal personality disorder has a relative ly stable course, with only a small propor-
tion of individuals going on to develop sc hizophrenia or another psychotic disorder.
Schizotypal personality disorder may be firs t apparent in childhood and adolescence with
solitariness, poor peer relationships, social anxiety, underachievement in school, hyper-
sensitivity, peculiar thoughts and language, an d bizarre fantasies. These children may ap-
pear “odd” or “eccentric” and attract teasing. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Schizotypal personality disord er appears to aggregate fa-
milially and is more prevalent among the firs t-degree biological relatives of individuals
with schizophrenia than among the general po pulation. There may also be a modest in-
crease in schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders in the relatives of probands with
schizotypal personality disorder.
Cultural-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cognitive and perceptual distortions must be evaluated in the context of the individual’s
cultural milieu. Pervasive cultur ally determined characteristic s, particularly those regard-
ing religious beliefs and rituals, can appear to be schizotypal to the uninformed outsider
(e.g., voodoo, speaking in tongues, life beyo nd death, shamanism, mind reading, sixth
sense, evil eye, magical beliefs related to health and illness).
658 Personality Disorders
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Schizotypal personality disorder may be slightly more common in males.
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders with psychotic symptoms. Schizotypal personality disorder
can be distinguished from de lusional disorder, schizophrenia , and a bipolar or depressive
disorder with psychotic features because thes e disorders are all characterized by a period
of persistent psychotic symptoms (e.g., delu sions and hallucinations). To give an addi-
tional diagnosis of schizotypal personality disorder, the personality disorder must have
been present before the onset of psychoti c symptoms and persis t when the psychotic
symptoms are in remission. Wh en an individual has a persist ent psychotic disorder (e.g.,
schizophrenia) that was preceded by schizo typal personality disorder, schizotypal per-
sonality disorder should also  be recorded, followed by “premorbid” in parentheses.
Neurodevelopmental disorders. There may be great difficulty differentiating children
with schizotypal personality disorder from the heterogeneous group of solitary, odd chil-
dren whose behavior is characterized by mark ed social isolation, eccentricity, or peculiar-
ities of language and whose diagnoses woul d probably include milder forms of autism
spectrum disorder or language communicat ion disorders. Commun ication disorders may
be differentiated by the primacy and severity of the disorder in language and by the char-
acteristic features of impaired language found in a specialized language assessment.
Milder forms of autism spectrum disorder are differentiated by the even greater lack of so-
cial awareness and emotional reciprocity and stereotyped behaviors and interests.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Schizotypal personality disor-
der must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge ar e attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system. 
Substance use disorders. Schizotypal personality disorder  must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in a ssociation with persistent substance use.
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may
be confused with schizotypal personality diso rder because they have certain features in
common. It is, therefore, important to distin guish among these disorders based on differ-
ences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features
that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to schizotypal person-
ality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although paranoid and schizoid personality disor-
ders may also be characterized by social de tachment and restricted affect, schizotypal
personality disorder can be distinguished fr om these two diagnoses by the presence of
cognitive or perceptual distortions and marked eccentricity or oddn ess. Close relation-
ships are limited in both schizotypal person ality disorder and avoidant personality dis-
order; however, in avoidant personality disorder an active desire for relationships is
constrained by a fear of rejection, whereas in schizotypal personality disorder there is
a lack of desire for relationships and persis tent detachment. Indivi duals with narcissistic
personality disorder may also display suspic iousness, social withdrawal, or alienation,
but in narcissistic personality disorder these qualities derive primarily from fears of hav-
ing imperfections or flaws revealed. Individu als with borderline personality disorder may
also have transient, psychotic-like symptoms, but these are usually more closely related to
affective shifts in response to  stress (e.g., intense anger, anxiety, disappointment) and are
usually more dissociative (e.g., derealization, depersonalization). In contrast, individuals
with schizotypal personality disorder are more likely to have enduring psychotic-like symp-
toms that may worsen under stress but are less  likely to be invariably associated with pro-
nounced affective symptoms. Although social isolation may occur in borderline personality
Antisocial Personality Disorder 659
disorder, it is usually secondary to repeated  interpersonal failures due to angry outbursts
and frequent mood shifts, rather than a result of a persistent lack of social contacts and de-
sire for intimacy. Furt hermore, individuals with schizoty pal personality disorder do not
usually demonstrate the impulsiv e or manipulative behaviors of the individual with bor-
derline personality diso rder. However, there is a high ra te of co-occurren ce between the
two disorders, so that making such distinctions is not always  feasible. Schizotypal features
during adolescence may be reflective of transi ent emotional turmoil, rather than an endur-
ing personality disorder.
Cluster B Personality Disorders
Antisocial Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.7 (F60.2)
A. A pervasive pattern of disregard for and violation of the rights of others, occurring since
age 15 years, as indicated by three (or more) of the following:
1. Failure to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behaviors, as indicated by
repeatedly performing acts that are grounds for arrest.
2. Deceitfulness, as indicated by repeated lying, use of aliases, or conning others for
personal profit or pleasure.
3. Impulsivity or failure to plan ahead.
4. Irritability and aggressiveness, as indicated by repeated physical fights or assaults.
5. Reckless disregard for safety of self or others.
6. Consistent irresponsibility, as indicated by repeated failure to sustain consistent
work behavior or honor financial obligations.
7. Lack of remorse, as indicated by being indifferent to or rationalizing having hurt,
mistreated, or stolen from another.
B. The individual is at least age 18 years.
C. There is evidence of conduct disorder with onset before age 15 years.
D. The occurrence of antisocial behavior is not exclusively during the course of schizo-
phrenia or bipolar disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of antisocial personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of disregard
for, and violation of, the rights of others that  begins in childhood or early adolescence and
continues into adulthood. This pattern  has also been referred to as psychopathy, sociopathy,
or dyssocial personality disorder.  Because deceit and manipulation are central features of an-
tisocial personality disorder, it  may be especially helpful to  integrate information acquired
from systematic clinical assessment with information collected from collateral sources.
For this diagnosis to be given, the individual  must be at least age 18 years (Criterion B)
and must have had a history of some symptoms of conduct disorder before age 15 years
(Criterion C). Conduct disorder involves a repe titive and persistent pattern of behavior in
which the basic rights of othe rs or major age-appropriate societal norms or rules are vio-
lated. The specific behaviors characteristic of  conduct disorder fall into one of four cate-
gories: aggression to people and animals, destruction of proper ty, deceitfulness or theft, or
serious violation of rules. 
660 Personality Disorders
The pattern of antisocial behavior continues into adulthood. Indi viduals with antiso-
cial personality disorder fail to conform to social norms with respect to lawful behavior
(Criterion A1). They may repeatedly perfor m acts that are grounds for arrest (whether
they are arrested or not), such as destroying  property, harassing ot hers, stealing, or pur-
suing illegal occupations. Persons with this di sorder disregard the wishes, rights, or feel-
ings of others. They are freq uently deceitful and manipulative in order to gain personal
profit or pleasure (e.g., to obtain money, sex,  or power) (Criterion A2). They may repeat-
edly lie, use an alias, con others, or malinger. A pattern of impulsiv ity may be manifested
by a failure to plan ahead (Criterion A3). Decisions are made on the spur of the moment,
without forethought and without consideration fo r the consequences to self or others; this
may lead to sudden changes of jobs, residences , or relationships. Individuals with antiso-
cial personality disorder tend to be irrita ble and aggressive and may repeatedly get into
physical fights or commit acts of physical assau lt (including spouse beating or child beat-
ing) (Criterion A4). (Aggressive acts that are required to defend oneself or someone else
are not considered to be evidence for this it em.) These individuals also display a reckless
disregard for the safety of themselves or othe rs (Criterion A5). This may be evidenced in
their driving behavior (i.e., recurrent speedi ng, driving while intoxicated, multiple acci-
dents). They may engage in sexual behavior or  substance use that has a high risk for harm-
ful consequences. They may neglec t or fail to care for a child in a way that puts the child in
danger.
Individuals with antisocial personality disord er also tend to be consistently and ex-
tremely irresponsible (Criterion A6). Irrespon sible work behavior may be indicated by sig-
nificant periods of unemployme nt despite available job opportunities, or by abandonment
of several jobs without a realistic plan for ge tting another job. There may also be a pattern
of repeated absences fr om work that are not explained by illness either in themselves or in
their family. Financial irresponsibility is indicated by acts such as defaulting on debts, fail-
ing to provide child support, or  failing to support other dependents on a regular basis. In-
dividuals with antisocial personality disorder  show little remorse for the consequences of
their acts (Criterion A7). They  may be indifferent to, or provide a superficial rationaliza-
tion for, having hurt, mistreated, or stolen from someone (e.g., “life’s unfair,” “losers de-
serve to lose”). These individuals may blame the victims for being foolish, helpless, or
deserving their fate (e.g., “he had it coming  anyway”); they may minimize the harmful
consequences of their actions; or they may simply indicate complete indifference. They
generally fail to compensate or make amends  for their behavior. They may believe that
everyone is out to “help number one” and that  one should stop at nothing to avoid being
pushed around.
The antisocial behavior must not occur excl usively during the course of schizophrenia
or bipolar disorder (Criterion D).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with antisocial personality disord er frequently lack empathy and tend to be
callous, cynical, and contempt uous of the feelings, rights, and sufferings of others. They
may have an inflated and arrogant self-appraisa l (e.g., feel that ordinary work is beneath
them or lack a realistic concern about their current problems or th eir future) and may be
excessively opinionated, self-assured, or coc ky. They may display a glib, superficial charm
and can be quite voluble and verbally facile (e.g., using technical terms or jargon that
might impress someone who is unfamiliar with th e topic). Lack of empathy, inflated self-
appraisal, and superficial charm are features that have been commonly included in tradi-
tional conceptions of psychopathy that may be  particularly distinguishing of the disorder
and more predictive of recidivism in prison  or forensic settings, where criminal, delin-
quent, or aggressive acts are likely to be no nspecific. These individuals may also be irre-
sponsible and exploitative in their sexual re lationships. They may have a history of many
Antisocial Personality Disorder 661
sexual partners and may never have sustained a monogamous relationship. They may be
irresponsible as parents, as evidenced by maln utrition of a child, an illness in the child re-
sulting from a lack of minimal hygiene, a ch ild’s dependence on neighbors or nonresident
relatives for food or shelter, a failure to arrange for a caretaker for a young child when the
individual is away from home, or repeated squandering of money required for household
necessities. These individuals may receive di shonorable discharges from the armed ser-
vices, may fail to be self-supporting, may be come impoverished or even homeless, or may
spend many years in penal institutions. Indi viduals with antisocial personality disorder
are more likely than people in the general po pulation to die prematurely by violent means
(e.g., suicide, accidents, homicides).
Individuals with antisocial personality disorder may also experience dysphoria, in-
cluding complaints of tension, inability to  tolerate boredom, and depressed mood. They
may have associated anxiety disorders, depressive disorders, substa nce use disorders, so-
matic symptom disorder, gambli ng disorder, and other disord ers of impulse control. In-
dividuals with antisocial personality disorder  also often have personality features that
meet criteria for other personality disorders,  particularly borderline, histrionic, and nar-
cissistic personality disorders. The likelihood  of developing antisocial personality disor-
der in adult life is increased if the indivi dual experienced childhood onset of conduct
disorder (before age 10 years) and accompanyi ng attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Child abuse or neglect, unstable or erratic parenting, or inconsistent parental discipline
may increase the likelihood that conduct disord er will evolve into antisocial personality
disorder.
Prevalence
Twelve-month prevalence rates of antisocial personality diso rder, using criteria from pre-
vious DSMs, are between 0.2% and 3.3%. The highest prevalence of antisocial personality
disorder (greater than 70%) is among most se vere samples of males with alcohol use dis-
order and from substance abuse clinics, prison s, or other forensic settings. Prevalence is
higher in samples affected by adverse socioeconomic (i.e., poverty) or sociocultural (i.e.,
migration) factors.
Development and Course
Antisocial personality disorder has a chronic course but may become less evident or remit
as the individual grows older, particularly by the fourth deca de of life. Although this re-
mission tends to be particularly evident with respect to engaging in criminal behavior,
there is likely to be a decrease in the full spectrum of antisocial behaviors and substance
use. By definition, antisocial personalit y cannot be diagnosed before age 18 years.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Antisocial personality disorder  is more common among the
first-degree biological relatives of those with the disorder than in the general population.
The risk to biological relatives of females with  the disorder tends to be higher than the risk
to biological relatives of males with the disorder. Biological  relatives of individuals with
this disorder are also at in creased risk for somatic symptom disorder and substance use
disorders. Within a family that has a member with antisocial personality disorder, males
more often have antisocial personality disord er and substance use disorders, whereas fe-
males more often have somatic symptom disorder. However, in such families, there is an
increase in prevalence of al l of these disorders in both males and females compared with
the general population. Adoption studies indi cate that both genetic and environmental
factors contribute to the risk of developing antisocial personality disorder. Both adopted
and biological children of parents with antisocial personality disorder have an increased
662 Personality Disorders
risk of developing antisocial personality disorder, somatic symptom disorder, and sub-
stance use disorders. Adopted-away children resemble their biological parents more than
their adoptive parents,  but the adoptive family environm ent influences the risk of devel-
oping a personality disorder and related psychopathology.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Antisocial personality disorder appears to be associated with low socioeconomic status
and urban settings. Concerns have been raised  that the diagnosis may at times be misap-
plied to individuals in settings in which seemingly antisocial behavior may be part of a
protective survival stra tegy. In assessing antisocial traits, it is helpful for the clinician to
consider the social and economic co ntext in which the behaviors occur.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Antisocial personality disorder is much more common in males than in females. There has
been some concern that antisocial persona lity disorder may be underdiagnosed in fe-
males, particularly because of the emphasis on  aggressive items in the definition of con-
duct disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
The diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder is not given to individuals younger than
18 years and is given only if there is a histor y of some symptoms of conduct disorder be-
fore age 15 years. For individuals older than 18 years, a diagnosis of conduct disorder is
given only if the criteria for antiso cial personality disorder are not met.
Substance use disorders. When antisocial behavior in an adult is associated with a
substance use disorder, the diagnosis of antisoci al personality disorder is not made unless
the signs of antisocial personality disorder were also present in childhood and have con-
tinued into adulthood. When substance use and antisocial behavior both began in childhood
and continued into adulthood, both a substance use disorder  and antisocial personality
disorder should be diagnosed if the criteria fo r both are met, even though some antisocial
acts may be a consequence of the substance us e disorder (e.g., illegal selling of drugs, thefts
to obtain money for drugs).
Schizophrenia and bipolar disorders. Antisocial behavior that  occurs exclusively dur-
ing the course of schizophrenia or a bipolar disorder should not be diagnosed as antisocial
personality disorder. 
Other personality disorders. Other personality disorders may be confused with antiso-
cial personality disorder because they have certain features in common. It is therefore im-
portant to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an indivi dual has personality features that meet criteria for one or
more personality disorders in addition to antisocial personality disorder, all can be diag-
nosed. Individuals with antisocial personalit y disorder and narcissistic personality disor-
der share a tendency to be tough-minded, glib , superficial, exploitative, and lack empathy.
However, narcissistic personality disorder does not include ch aracteristics of impulsivity,
aggression, and deceit. In addition, individuals with antisocial personality disorder may
not be as needy of the admiration and envy of others, and persons with narcissistic per-
sonality disorder usually lack the history of  conduct disorder in childhood or criminal
behavior in adulthood. Indivi duals with antisocial personality disorder and histrionic
personality disorder share a tendency to be impulsive, superficial,  excitement seeking,
reckless, seductive, and manipulative, but pe rsons with histrionic personality disorder
tend to be more exaggerated in their emotions  and do not characteristically engage in an-
tisocial behaviors. Individuals with histrion ic and borderline pers onality disorders are
Borderline Personality Disorder 663
manipulative to gain nurturance, whereas thos e with antisocial personality disorder are
manipulative to gain profit, po wer, or some other material gratification. Individuals with
antisocial personality disorder tend to be less emotionally unstable and more aggressive
than those with borderline personality disorder. Although antisocial behavior may be
present in some individuals with paranoid pe rsonality disorder, it is not usually moti-
vated by a desire for personal gain  or to exploit others as in antisocial personality disorder,
but rather is more often attributable to a desire for revenge.
Criminal behavior not associated  with a personality disorder. Antisocial personality
disorder must be distinguished from criminal behavior undertaken for gain that is not ac-
companied by the personality features characteristic of this disorder. Only when antisocial
personality traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and persistent and cause significant func-
tional impairment or subjective distress do th ey constitute antisocial personality disorder.
Borderline Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.83 (F60.3)
A pervasive pattern of instability of interpersonal relationships, self-image, and affects,
and marked impulsivity, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts,
as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
1. Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment. ( Note:  Do not include suicidal
or self-mutilating behavior covered in Criterion 5.)
2. A pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships characterized by alternat-
ing between extremes of idealization and devaluation.
3. Identity disturbance: markedly and persistently unstable self-image or sense of self.
4. Impulsivity in at least two areas that are potentially self-damaging (e.g., spending, sex,
substance abuse, reckless driving, binge eating). ( Note:  Do not include suicidal or self-
mutilating behavior covered in Criterion 5.)
5. Recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self-mutilating behavior.
6. Affective instability due to a marked reactivity of mood (e.g., intense episodic dysphoria,
irritability, or anxiety usually lasting a few hours and only rarely more than a few days).
7. Chronic feelings of emptiness.
8. Inappropriate, intense anger or difficulty controlling anger (e.g., frequent displays of
temper, constant anger, recurrent physical fights).
9. Transient, stress-related paranoid ideation or severe dissociative symptoms.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of  borderline personality disorder is  a pervasive pattern of instability
of interpersonal relationships, self-image, an d affects, and marked impulsivity that begins
by early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with borderline pe rsonality disorder make fran tic efforts to avoid real or
imagined abandonment (Criterion 1). The perception of impending separation or rejection,
or the loss of external structure, can lead to profound changes in sel f-image, affect, cognition,
and behavior. These individuals are very sensitive to environmental circumstances. They ex-
perience intense abandonment fears and inappropriate anger even when  faced with a real-
istic time-limited separation or when there are unavoidable changes in plans (e.g., sudden
despair in reaction to a clinician’s announcing the end of the hour; panic or fury when some-
one important to them is just a few minutes la te or must cancel an appointment). They may
believe that this “abandonment” implies they  are “bad.” These abandonment fears are re-
lated to an intolerance of being alone and a need  to have other people with them. Their frantic
664 Personality Disorders
efforts to avoid abandonment may include impulsive actions such as self-mutilating or sui-
cidal behaviors, which are described separately in Criterion 5.
Individuals with borderline personality disord er have a pattern of unstable and intense
relationships (Criterion 2). They may idealize potential caregivers or lovers at the first or
second meeting, demand to spend a lot of time  together, and share the most intimate details
early in a relationship. Howeve r, they may switch quickly from idealizing other people to
devaluing them, feeling that the other person does not care enough, does not give enough,
or is not “there” enough. These individuals can empathize with and nurture other people,
but only with the expectation th at the other person will “be ther e” in return to meet their
own needs on demand. These indi viduals are prone to sudden and dramatic shifts in their
view of others, who may alternatively be seen as beneficent supports or as cruelly punitive.
Such shifts often reflect disillusionment with a caregiver whose nurturing qualities had
been idealized or whose rejectio n or abandonment is expected.
There may be an identity disturbance charac terized by markedly and persistently un-
stable self-image or sense of self (Criterion 3). There are sudden and dramatic shifts in self-
image, characterized by shifting goals, values, and vocational aspirations. There may be
sudden changes in opinions and plans about ca reer, sexual identity, values, and types of
friends. These individuals may suddenly chan ge from the role of a needy supplicant for
help to that of a righteous av enger of past mistreat ment. Although they usually have a self-
image that is based on being bad or evil, individuals with this disorder may at times have
feelings that they do not exist at all. Such experiences usually occur in situations in which
the individual feels a lack of a meaningful relationship, nurturing, and support. These in-
dividuals may show worse performance in unstructured work or school situations.
Individuals with borderline pe rsonality disorder display impulsivity in at least two areas
that are potentially self-damaging (Criterion  4). They may gamble, spend money irrespon-
sibly, binge eat, abuse substanc es, engage in unsafe sex, or  drive recklessly. Individuals
with this disorder display recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or self-mutilat-
ing behavior (Criterion 5). Completed suicide occurs in 8%–10% of such individuals, and
self-mutilative acts (e.g., cutting or burnin g) and suicide threats and attempts are very
common. Recurrent suicidality is often the reason that these individuals present for help.
These self-destructive acts are usually precipit ated by threats of separation or rejection or
by expectations that the individual assumes increased responsibility. Self-mutilation may
occur during dissociative experiences and often brings relief by reaffirming the ability to
feel or by expiating the individual’s sense of being evil.
Individuals with borderline personality disorder may display affective instability that
is due to a marked reactivity of  mood (e.g., intense episodic dysphoria, irritability, or anx-
iety usually lasting a few hours and only rarely more than a few days) (Criterion 6). The
basic dysphoric mood of those with borderline personality disorder is often disrupted by
periods of anger, panic, or de spair and is rarely relieved by periods of well-being or satis-
faction. These episodes may reflect the indivi dual’s extreme reactivity to interpersonal
stresses. Individuals with borderline personalit y disorder may be troubled by chronic feel-
ings of emptiness (Criterion 7). Easily bored,  they may constantly seek something to do.
Individuals with this disorder frequently expr ess inappropriate, intense anger or have dif-
ficulty controlling their anger (Criterion 8) . They may display extreme sarcasm, enduring
bitterness, or verbal outbursts. The anger is often elicited when  a caregiver or lover is seen
as neglectful, withholding, uncaring, or abandoning. Such expressions of anger are often
followed by shame and guilt and contribute to the feeling they have of being evil. During
periods of extreme stress , transient paranoid ideation or dissociative symptoms (e.g., de-
personalization) may occur (Criterion 9), but th ese are generally of insufficient severity or
duration to warrant an addition al diagnosis. These episodes occur most frequently in re-
sponse to a real or imagined abandonment. Symptoms tend to be transient, lasting min-
utes or hours. The real or perceived return of the caregiver’s nurturance may result in a
remission of symptoms.
Borderline Personality Disorder 665
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with borderline personality disorder may have a pattern of undermining
themselves at the moment a goal is about to be realized (e.g., dropping out of school just
before graduation; regressing se verely after a discussion of ho w well therapy is going; de-
stroying a good relationship just when it is clear that the relationship could last). Some in-
dividuals develop psychotic-like symptoms (e.g ., hallucinations, body-image distortions,
ideas of reference, hypnagogic phenomena) du ring times of stress. Individuals with this
disorder may feel more secure with transition al objects (i.e., a pet or inanimate possession)
than in interpersonal relationships. Prematur e death from suicide may occur in individu-
als with this disorder, especially in those with co-occurring depressive disorders or sub-
stance use disorders. Physical handicaps may result from self-inflicted abuse behaviors or
failed suicide attempts. Recurrent job losses, in terrupted education, and separation or di-
vorce are common. Physical and sexual abuse, neglect, hostile conflict, and early parental
loss are more common in the childhood histor ies of those with borderline personality dis-
order. Common co-occurring disorders include depressive and bipolar disorders, sub-
stance use disorders, eating disorders (not ably bulimia nervosa), posttraumatic stress
disorder, and attention-defici t/hyperactivity disorder. Bo rderline personality disorder
also frequently co-occurs with the other personality disorders.
Prevalence
The median population prevalence of border line personality disorder is estimated to be
1.6% but may be as high as 5.9%. The preval ence of borderline personality disorder is
about 6% in primary care sett ings, about 10% among individual s seen in outpatient mental
health clinics, and about 20% among psychiat ric inpatients. The prevalence of borderline
personality disorder may decrease in older age groups. 
Development and Course
There is considerable variability in the course of borderline personality disorder. The most
common pattern is one of chronic instability in early adulthoo d, with episodes of serious
affective and impulsive dyscontrol and high levels of use of health and mental health re-
sources. The impairment from the disorder and the risk of suicide are greatest in the
young-adult years and gradually wane with advancing age. Although the tendency to-
ward intense emotions, impulsivity, and intens ity in relationships is often lifelong, indi-
viduals who engage in therapeutic interv ention often show improvement beginning
sometime during the first year. During their 30s and 40s, the majority of individuals with
this disorder attain greater stability in their relationships and vocational functioning. Fol-
low-up studies of individuals identified thr ough outpatient mental health clinics indicate
that after about 10 years, as many as half of the individuals no longer  have a pattern of be-
havior that meets full criteria for borderline personality disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Borderline personality disorder is about five times more
common among first-degree biological relatives of those with the disorder than in the gen-
eral population. There is  also an increased familial risk for substance use disorders, anti-
social personality disorder, and depressive or bipolar disorders.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The pattern of behavior seen in  borderline personality disorder  has been identified in many
settings around the world. Adolescents and youn g adults with identity  problems (especially
when accompanied by substance use) may transiently display behaviors that misleadingly
666 Personality Disorders
give the impression of borderline personality disorder. Such situations are characterized by
emotional instability, “existential” dilemmas, uncertainty, anxiety- provoking choices, con-
flicts about sexual orientation, and competing social pressures to decide on careers. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Borderline personality disord er is diagnosed predominantly (about 75%) in females.
Differential Diagnosis
Depressive and bipolar disorders. Borderline personality disorder often co-occurs with
depressive or bipolar disorders, and when criteria for both are met, both may be diagnosed.
Because the cross-sectional presentation of bo rderline personality disorder can be mimicked
by an episode of depressive or bipolar disord er, the clinician should avoid giving an addi-
tional diagnosis of borderline personality diso rder based only on cr oss-sectional presenta-
tion without having documented that the pattern of behavior had an early onset and a long-
standing course.
Other personality disorders. Other personality disorders ma y be confused with border-
line personality disorder because they have certain features in  common. It is therefore im-
portant to distinguish among these disorders based on differences in their characteristic
features. However, if an individual has person ality features that meet criteria for one or
more personality disorders in addition to bord erline personality disorder, all can be diag-
nosed. Although histrionic personality disorder can also be characterized by attention seek-
ing, manipulative behavior, an d rapidly shifting emotions, borderline personality disorder
is distinguished by self-destructiveness, an gry disruptions in close relationships, and
chronic feelings of deep emptiness and loneline ss. Paranoid ideas or illusions may be pres-
ent in both borderline personality disorder an d schizotypal personality disorder, but these
symptoms are more transient, in terpersonally reactive, and responsive to external structur-
ing in borderline personality disorder. Althou gh paranoid personalit y disorder and narcis-
sistic personality disorder may also be charac terized by an angry reaction to minor stimuli,
the relative stability of self-ima ge, as well as the relative lack  of self-destructiveness, impul-
sivity, and abandonment concerns, distinguishe s these disorders from borderline person-
ality disorder. Although antisocial personality disorder and borderline personality disorder
are both characterized by mani pulative behavior, in dividuals with antisocial personality
disorder are manipulative to gain profit, po wer, or some other material gratification,
whereas the goal in borderline personality disorder is directed  more toward gaining the con-
cern of caretakers. Both depe ndent personality disorder and borderline personality disorder
are characterized by fear of abandonment; however, the individual with borderline person-
ality disorder reacts to abandonment with f eelings of emotional emptiness, rage, and de-
mands, whereas the individual with dependent personality disorder re acts with increasing
appeasement and submissiveness and urgently seeks a replacement relationship to provide
caregiving and support. Borderline personality disorder can further be distinguished from
dependent personality disorder by the typical pattern of unstable and intense relationships.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Borderline personality disor-
der must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge ar e attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system.
Substance use disorders. Borderline personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in a ssociation with persistent substance use.
Identity problems. Borderline personality disorder sh ould be distinguished from an
identity problem, which is re served for identity concerns related to a developmental phase
(e.g., adolescence) and does no t qualify as a me ntal disorder.
Histrionic Personality Disorder 667
Histrionic Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.50 (F60.4)
A pervasive pattern of excessive emotionality and attention seeking, beginning by early adult-
hood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
1. Is uncomfortable in situations in which he or she is not the center of attention.
2. Interaction with others is often characterized by inappropriate sexually seductive or
provocative behavior.
3. Displays rapidly shifting and shallow expression of emotions.
4. Consistently uses physical appearance to draw attention to self.
5. Has a style of speech that is excessively impressionistic and lacking in detail.
6. Shows self-dramatization, theatricality, and exaggerated expression of emotion.
7. Is suggestible (i.e., easily influenced by others or circumstances).
8. Considers relationships to be more intimate than they actually are.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of histrionic personalit y disorder is pervasiv e and excessive emotion-
ality and attention-seeking behavior. This pattern begins by early adulthood and is pres-
ent in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with histrionic personality diso rder are uncomfortabl e or feel unappreci-
ated when they are not the center of attentio n (Criterion 1). Often lively and dramatic, they
tend to draw attention to themselves and ma y initially charm new acquaintances by their
enthusiasm, apparent openness, or flirtatiousness. These qua lities wear thin, however, as
these individuals continually demand to be th e center of attention. They commandeer the
role of “the life of the party.” If they are not the center of attention, they may do something
dramatic (e.g., make up stories,  create a scene) to draw the fo cus of attention to themselves.
This need is often apparent in their behavior wi th a clinician (e.g., being flattering, bring-
ing gifts, providing dramatic  descriptions of physical and psychological symptoms that
are replaced by new symptoms each visit).
The appearance and behavior of individuals with this disorder are often inappropri-
ately sexually provocative or seductive (Criteri on 2). This behavior not only is directed to-
ward persons in whom the individual has a sexu al or romantic interest but also occurs in
a wide variety of social, occupational, and professional rela tionships beyond what is ap-
propriate for the social context. Emotional ex pression may be shallow and rapidly shifting
(Criterion 3). Individuals with this disorder  consistently use physical appearance to draw
attention to themselves (Criterion 4). They are overly concerned with  impressing others by
their appearance and expend an excessive am ount of time, energy, and money on clothes
and grooming. They may “fish for compliments” regarding appearance and may be easily
and excessively upset by a critical comment about how they look or by a photograph that
they regard as unflattering.
These individuals have a style of speech that  is excessively impre ssionistic and lacking
in detail (Criterion 5). Strong opinions are expressed with dramatic flair, but underlying
reasons are usually vague and diffuse, with out supporting facts and details. For example,
an individual with histrionic personality disorder may comment that a certain individual
is a wonderful human being, yet be unable to provide any specific examples of good qual-
ities to support this opinion.  Individuals with this disorder are characterized by self-
dramatization, theatricality, and an exaggera ted expression of emotion (Criterion 6). They
may embarrass friends and acquaintances by an excessive public displa y of emotions (e.g.,
embracing casual acquaintances with excessive  ardor, sobbing uncontrollably on minor
668 Personality Disorders
sentimental occasions, having temper tantru ms). However, their emotions often seem to
be turned on and off too quickly to be deeply felt, which may lead others to accuse the in-
dividual of faking these feelings.
Individuals with histrionic pers onality disorder have a high degree of suggestibility (Cri-
terion 7). Their opinions and f eelings are easily influenced by  others and by current fads.
They may be overly trusting, especially of st rong authority figures whom they see as mag-
ically solving their problems. They have a te ndency to play hunches and to adopt convic-
tions quickly. Individuals with  this disorder often consider  relationships more intimate
than they actually are, describing almost every acquaintance as “my dear, dear friend” or
referring to physicians met only once or twice under professional circumstances by their
first names (Criterion 8). 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with histrionic personality disord er may have difficulty achieving emotional in-
timacy in romantic or sexual relationships. Without being aware of it, they often act out a
role (e.g., “victim” or “princess”) in their rela tionships to others. They  may seek to control
their partner through emotional manipulation or  seductiveness on one level, while display-
ing a marked dependency on them at another level. Individuals with this disorder often
have impaired relationships with same-sex friends because their sexually provocative inter-
personal style may seem a threat  to their friends’ relationsh ips. These individuals may also
alienate friends with demands for constant a ttention. They often become depressed and up-
set when they are not the center of attention.  They may crave novelty, stimulation, and ex-
citement and have a tendency to become bore d with their usual routine. These individuals
are often intolerant of, or frustrated by, situ ations that involve delayed gratification, and
their actions are often directed at obtaining immediate satisfac tion. Although they often ini-
tiate a job or project with great enthusiasm, their interest may lag quickly. Longer-term re-
lationships may be ne glected to make way for the ex citement of new relationships.
The actual risk of suicide is not known, bu t clinical experience suggests that individu-
als with this disorder are at in creased risk for suicidal gestur es and threats to get attention
and coerce better caregiving. Histrionic personality disorder has been associated with
higher rates of somatic symptom disorder, conversion disorder (functional neurological
symptom disorder), and major depressive disord er. Borderline, narcissistic, antisocial, and
dependent personality disorders often co-occur.
Prevalence
Data from the 2001–2002 National Epidemio logic Survey on Alcohol and Related Condi-
tions suggest a prevalence of histrionic personality of 1.84%.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Norms for interpersonal behavior, personal  appearance, and emotional expressiveness
vary widely across cultures, genders, and age groups. Before considering the various traits
(e.g., emotionality,  seductiveness, dramatic interperso nal style, novelty seeking, sociabil-
ity, charm, impressionability, a tendency to somatization) to be  evidence of histrionic per-
sonality disorder, it is impo rtant to evaluate whether they  cause clinically significant
impairment or distress. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In clinical settings, this disorder has been di agnosed more frequently in females; however,
the sex ratio is not significantly different from the sex ratio of females within the respective
clinical setting. In contrast, some studies using structured assessments report similar prev-
alence rates among males and females.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder 669
Differential Diagnosis
Other personality disorder s and personality traits. Other personality disorders may
be confused with histrionic personality disorder because they have certain features in
common. It is therefore important to distinguish among these disorders based on differ-
ences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features
that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to histrionic personal-
ity disorder, all can be diagnosed. Although  borderline personality disorder can also be
characterized by attention seeking, manipulati ve behavior, and rapidly shifting emotions,
it is distinguished by self-destructiveness, angry disruptions in close relationships, and
chronic feelings of deep emptiness and identi ty disturbance. Individuals with antisocial
personality disorder and histrionic personalit y disorder share a tend ency to be impulsive,
superficial, excitement seeking, reckless, seductive, and manipulative, but persons with
histrionic personality disorder tend to be mo re exaggerated in their emotions and do not
characteristically engage in antisocial behavi ors. Individuals with histrionic personality
disorder are manipulative to gain nurturance , whereas those with antisocial personality
disorder are manipulative to gain profit, powe r, or some other material gratification. Al-
though individuals with narcissistic personalit y disorder also crave attention from others,
they usually want praise for their “superiority,” whereas individuals with histrionic per-
sonality disorder are willing to be viewed as frag ile or dependent if this is instrumental in
getting attention. Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder may exaggerate the
intimacy of their relationships with other pe ople, but they are more apt to emphasize the
“VIP” status or wealth of th eir friends. In dependent personality disorder, the individual
is excessively dependent on othe rs for praise and guidance, but is without the flamboyant,
exaggerated, emotional features of individu als with histrionic personality disorder.
Many individuals may display histrionic personality traits. Only when these traits are
inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause significant functional impairment or
subjective distress do they constitu te histrionic personality disorder.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Histrionic personality disorder
must be distinguished from personality ch ange due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge ar e attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system. 
Substance use disorders. The disorder must also be distinguished from symptoms that
may develop in association with persistent substance use.
Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.81 (F60.81)
A pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behavior), need for admiration, and lack
of empathy, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated
by five (or more) of the following:
1. Has a grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g., exaggerates achievements and talents,
expects to be recognized as superior without commensurate achievements).
2. Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty, or ideal
love.
3. Believes that he or she is “special” and unique and can only be understood by, or
should associate with, other special or high-status people (or institutions).
4. Requires excessive admiration.
5. Has a sense of entitlement (i.e., unreasonable expectations of especially favorable
treatment or automatic compliance with his or her expectations).
670 Personality Disorders
6. Is interpersonally exploitative (i.e., takes advantage of others to achieve his or her own
ends).
7. Lacks empathy: is unwilling to recognize or identify with the feelings and needs of others.
8. Is often envious of others or believes that others are envious of him or her.
9. Shows arrogant, haughty behaviors or attitudes.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of narcissistic personality disorder is a pervasive pattern of grandi-
osity, need for admiration, and lack of empathy that begins by early adulthood and is pres-
ent in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with this disorder have a grandiose sense of self-impor tance (Criterion 1).
They routinely overestimate their abilities and in flate their accomplishme nts, often appearing
boastful and pretentious. They may blithely assume that others attribute the same value to
their efforts and may be surprised when the prai se they expect and feel they deserve is not
forthcoming. Often implicit in the inflated ju dgments of their own accomplishments is an un-
derestimation (devaluation) of the contributions of others. Individuals with narcissistic per-
sonality disorder are often preo ccupied with fantasies of unlimit ed success, power, brilliance,
beauty, or ideal love (Criterion 2). They ma y ruminate about “long overdue” admiration and
privilege and compare themselves favora bly with famous or privileged people.
Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder believe that they are superior, spe-
cial, or unique and expect others to recogniz e them as such (Criterion 3). They may feel
that they can only be understood by, and sh ould only associate with, other people who are
special or of high status and may attribute “unique,” “perfect,” or “gifted” qualities to those
with whom they associate. Individuals with th is disorder believe that their needs are spe-
cial and beyond the ken of ordinary people. Their own self-esteem is enhanced (i.e., “mir-
rored”) by the idealized value that they assign  to those with whom they associate. They are
likely to insist on having only the “top” pers on (doctor, lawyer, hair dresser, instructor) or
being affiliated with the “best” institutions but may devalue the credentials of those who dis-
appoint them.
Individuals with this disorder generally require excessiv e admiration (Criterion 4). Their
self-esteem is almost invariably very fragile.  They may be preoccupied with how well they
are doing and how favorably they are regarded by  others. This often takes the form of a need
for constant attention and admira tion. They may expect their arri val to be greeted with great
fanfare and are astonished if others do not c ovet their possessions. Th ey may constantly fish
for compliments, often with great charm. A sens e of entitlement is ev ident in these individ-
uals’ unreasonable expectation of especially fa vorable treatment (Criterion 5). They expect
to be catered to and are puzzled or furious when this does not happen. For example, they
may assume that they do not have to wait in line and that th eir priorities are so important
that others should defer to them, and then ge t irritated when others fail to assist “in their
very important work.” This sense of entitlement,  combined with a lack of sensitivity to the
wants and needs of others, may result in the conscious or unwitting exploitation of others
(Criterion 6). They expect to be given whatever they want or  feel they need, no matter what
it might mean to others. For example, these individuals may expect great dedication from
others and may overwork them wi thout regard for the impact on  their lives. They tend to
form friendships or romantic relationships only if the other person seems likely to advance
their purposes or otherwise enhance their self -esteem. They often usurp special privileges
and extra resources that they believe th ey deserve because they are so special.
Individuals with narcissistic personality disorder generally have a lack of empathy and
have difficulty recognizing the desires, subjective  experiences, and feelings of others (Crite-
rion 7). They may assume that others are tota lly concerned about their welfare. They tend to
discuss their own concerns in inappropriate an d lengthy detail, while failing to recognize
that others also have feelings and needs. They are often contemptuous and impatient with
Narcissistic Personality Disorder 671
others who talk about their ow n problems and concerns. These individuals may be oblivious
to the hurt their remarks may in flict (e.g., exuberantly telling a former lover that “I am now
in the relationship of a lifetime !”; boasting of health in front of someone who is sick). When
recognized, the needs, desires, or feelings of others are likely to be viewed disparagingly as
signs of weakness or vulnerability. Those who re late to individuals with narcissistic person-
ality disorder typically find an emotional coldness and lack of reciprocal interest.
These individuals are often envious of others or believe that others are envious of them
(Criterion 8). They may begrudge others their su ccesses or possessions, fe eling that they better
deserve those achievements, admiration, or priv ileges. They may harshly devalue the contri-
butions of others, particularly when those individuals have received acknowledgment or
praise for their accomplishments. Arrogant, haug hty behaviors characterize these individuals;
they often display snobbish, disdainful, or patr onizing attitudes (Criterion 9). For example, an
individual with this disorder may complain about  a clumsy waiter’s “rudeness” or “stupidity”
or conclude a medical evaluation with a condescending evaluation of the physician.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Vulnerability in self-esteem makes individuals with narcissistic personality disorder very
sensitive to “injury” from criticism or defe at. Although they may not show it outwardly,
criticism may haunt these individuals and ma y leave them feeling humiliated, degraded,
hollow, and empty. They may react with disdain, rage, or defiant counterattack. Such ex-
periences often lead to social withdrawal or an appearance of humility that may mask and
protect the grandiosity. Interpersonal relation s are typically impaired because of problems
derived from entitlement, the need for admira tion, and the relative disregard for the sen-
sitivities of others. Though overweening ambition and confidence may lead to high
achievement, performance may be disrupted beca use of intolerance of criticism or defeat.
Sometimes vocational functioning can be very low, reflecting an unwillingness to take a
risk in competitive or other situations in wh ich defeat is possible.  Sustained feelings of
shame or humiliation and the attendant self-criticism may be associated with social with-
drawal, depressed mood, and persistent depr essive disorder (dysthymia) or major de-
pressive disorder. In contrast, sustained periods of grandiosity may be associated with a
hypomanic mood. Narcissistic personality disorder is also associated with anorexia ner-
vosa and substance use disorder s (especially related to cocaine). Histrionic, borderline,
antisocial, and paranoid personality disorders may be associated with narcissistic person-
ality disorder.
Prevalence
Prevalence estimates for narcissistic person ality disorder, based on DSM-IV definitions,
range from 0% to 6.2% in community samples. 
Development and Course
Narcissistic traits may be particularly comm on in adolescents and do not necessarily in-
dicate that the individual will go on to have narcissistic personality disorder. Individuals
with narcissistic personality disorder may have special difficulties adjusting to the onset of
physical and occupational limitations that  are inherent in the aging process. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Of those diagnosed with narcissistic personality disorder, 50%–75% are male.
Differential Diagnosis
Other personality disorder s and personality traits. Other personality disorders may
be confused with narcissistic personality disorder because they have certain features in
672 Personality Disorders
common. It is, therefore, important to distin guish among these disorders based on differ-
ences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features
that meet criteria for one or more personalit y disorders in addition to narcissistic person-
ality disorder, all can be diagnosed. The most useful feature in discriminating narcissistic
personality disorder from histrionic, antisocial, and borderline personality disorders, in
which the interactive styles are coquettish, callous, and needy, respectively, is the grandi-
osity characteristic of narcissistic personalit y disorder. The relative stability of self-image
as well as the relative lack of self-destruc tiveness, impulsivity, an d abandonment concerns
also help distinguish narcissistic personality disorder from borderline personality disor-
der. Excessive pride in achievements, a relative  lack of emotional display, and disdain for
others’ sensitivities help distinguish narci ssistic personality disorder from histrionic
personality disorder. Although individuals wi th borderline, histrionic, and narcissistic
personality disorders may requir e much attention, those with narcissistic personality dis-
order specifically need that attention to be admiring. Individuals with antisocial and nar-
cissistic personality disorders share a tendency to be tough-minded, glib, superficial,
exploitative, and unempathic. However, narciss istic personality disorder does not neces-
sarily include characteristics of impulsivity, aggression, and deceit. In addition, individu-
als with antisocial personality disorder may not be as needy of the admiration and envy of
others, and persons with narcissistic personal ity disorder usually lack the history of con-
duct disorder in childhood or criminal behavior in adulthood. In both narcissistic person-
ality disorder and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder, the individual may profess
a commitment to perfectionism and believe that  others cannot do things as well. In con-
trast to the accompanying self-criticism of those with obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder, individuals with narcissistic persona lity disorder are more likely to believe that
they have achieved perfection. Suspiciousness and social withdrawal usually distinguish
those with schizotypal or paranoid personalit y disorder from those with narcissistic per-
sonality disorder. When these qualities are pres ent in individuals with narcissistic person-
ality disorder, they derive primarily from fear s of having imperfections or flaws revealed. 
Many highly successful individuals display pe rsonality traits that might be considered
narcissistic. Only when these traits are inflexible, maladaptive, and persisting and cause
significant functional impairment or subjective  distress do they constitute narcissistic per-
sonality disorder.
Mania or hypomania. Grandiosity may emerge as part of manic or hypomanic episodes,
but the association with mood change or functional impairments helps distinguish these
episodes from narcissistic personality disorder. 
Substance use disorders. Narcissistic personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in a ssociation with persistent substance use.
Cluster C Personality Disorders
Avoidant Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.82 (F60.6)
A pervasive pattern of social inhibition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to neg-
ative evaluation, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as in-
dicated by four (or more) of the following:
1. Avoids occupational activities that invo lve significant interpersonal contact because of
fears of criticism, disapproval, or rejection.
Avoidant Personality Disorder 673
2. Is unwilling to get involved with people unless certain of being liked.
3. Shows restraint within intimate relationships because of the fear of being shamed or
ridiculed.
4. Is preoccupied with being criticized or rejected in social situations.
5. Is inhibited in new interpersonal situations because of feelings of inadequacy.
6. Views self as socially inept, personally unappealing, or inferior to others.
7. Is unusually reluctant to take personal risks or to engage in any new activities because
they may prove embarrassing.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of avoidant personality disorder is a pervasive pa ttern of social inhi-
bition, feelings of inadequacy, and hypersensitivity to negative evaluation that begins by
early adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with avoidant personality disord er avoid work activities that involve sig-
nificant interpersonal contact because of fears of criticism, disapprova l, or rejection (Cri-
terion 1). Offers of job prom otions may be declined because the new responsibilities might
result in criticism from co-workers. These individuals avoid making new friends unless
they are certain they will be liked and accept ed without criticism (Criterion 2). Until they
pass stringent tests proving the contrary, other people are assumed to be critical and dis-
approving. Individuals with this disorder will not join in group activities unless there are
repeated and generous offers of support and nurturance. Inte rpersonal intimacy is often
difficult for these individuals, although they are able to es tablish intimate relationships
when there is assurance of uncritical acceptan ce. They may act with restraint, have diffi-
culty talking about themselves, and withhold intimate feelings for fear of being exposed,
ridiculed, or shamed (Criterion 3).
Because individuals with this  disorder are preoccupied with being criticized or re-
jected in social situations, they may have a markedly low threshold for detecting such re-
actions (Criterion 4). If someone is even s lightly disapproving or critical, they may feel
extremely hurt. They tend to be shy, quiet, inhibited, and “invisible” because of the fear
that any attention would be degrading or reject ing. They expect that no matter what they
say, others will see it as “wrong,” and so th ey may say nothing at all. They react strongly
to subtle cues that are suggest ive of mockery or derision. Despite their longing to be active
participants in social life, they fear placing their welfare in the hands of others. Individuals
with avoidant personality disorder are inhibi ted in new interpersonal situations because
they feel inadequate and have low self-esteem (Criterion 5). Doubts concerning social
competence and personal appeal become especially manifest in settings involving inter-
actions with strangers. These individuals believe themselves to be socially inept, person-
ally unappealing, or inferior to others (Cri terion 6). They are unusually reluctant to take
personal risks or to engage in any new activities because these may prove embarrassing
(Criterion 7). They are prone to exaggerate the potential dangers of ordinary situations,
and a restricted lifestyle may result from their need for certainty and security. Someone
with this disorder may cancel a job interview for fear of being embarrassed by not dressing
appropriately. Marginal somatic symptoms or  other problems may become the reason for
avoiding new activities.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with avoidant personality disorder often vigilantly appr aise the movements
and expressions of those with whom they come  into contact. Their fearful and tense de-
meanor may elicit ridicule an d derision from others, which in turn confirms their self-
doubts. These individuals are very anxious about the possibility that they will react to crit-
icism with blushing or crying. They are described by others as being “shy,” “timid,”
674 Personality Disorders
“lonely,” and “isolated.” The major problems associated with this disorder occur in social
and occupational functi oning. The low self-esteem and hy persensitivity to rejection are
associated with restricted in terpersonal contacts. These individuals may become relatively
isolated and usually do not have a large social support ne twork that can help them weather
crises. They desire affection and acceptance and may fantasize about idealized relation-
ships with others. The avoidant behaviors can also adversely affect occupational function-
ing because these individuals try to avoid the types of social situations that may be
important for meeting the basic dema nds of the job or for advancement.
Other disorders that are commonly diagnosed with avoidant personality disorder in-
clude depressive, bipolar, and anxiety disorders,  especially social anxiety disorder (social
phobia). Avoidant personality disorder is often diagnosed with dependent personality
disorder, because individuals with avoidant pe rsonality disorder become very attached to
and dependent on those few other people wi th whom they are friends. Avoidant per-
sonality disorder also tends to  be diagnosed with borderline personality disorder and with
the Cluster A personality disorders (i.e., paranoid, schizoid, or schizotypal personality
disorders).
Prevalence
Data from the 2001–2002 National Epidemio logic Survey on Alcohol and Related Condi-
tions suggest a prevalence of about 2.4% for avoidant personality disorder.
Development and Course
The avoidant behavior often st arts in infancy or childhood with shyness, isolation, and
fear of strangers and new situations. Although  shyness in childhood is a common precur-
sor of avoidant personality disorder, in most individuals it tends to gradually dissipate as
they get older. In contrast, individuals who go on  to develop avoidant personality disor-
der may become increasingly shy and avoidant  during adolescence and early adulthood,
when social relationships with new people become especially important. There is some
evidence that in adults, avoi dant personality disorder tend s to become less evident or to
remit with age. This diagnosi s should be used with great caution in children and adoles-
cents, for whom shy and avoidant behavi or may be developmentally appropriate.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There may be variation in the degree to whic h different cultural and ethnic groups regard
diffidence and avoidance as appropriate. Mo reover, avoidant behavior may be the result
of problems in acculturat ion following immigration. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Avoidant personality disorder appears to be equally frequent in males and females.
Differential Diagnosis
Anxiety disorders. There appears to be a great deal of  overlap between avoidant person-
ality disorder and social anxiety disorder (s ocial phobia), so much so that they may be
alternative conceptualizations of the same or similar conditions. Avoidance also character-
izes both avoidant personality disorder and agoraphobia, and they often co-occur. 
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may
be confused with avoidant pers onality disorder because they have certain fe atures in com-
mon. It is, therefore, important to distingu ish among these disorder s based on differences
in their characteristic features. However, if  an individual has personality features that
meet criteria for one or more personality diso rders in addition to avoidant personality dis-
Dependent Personality Disorder 675
order, all can be diagnosed. Both avoidant personality disorder and dependent personal-
ity disorder are characterized by  feelings of inadequacy, hypersensitivity to criticism, and
a need for reassurance. Although the primary focus of concern in avoidant personality
disorder is avoidance of humiliation and reject ion, in dependent pers onality disorder the
focus is on being taken care of. However, avoidant personality disorder and dependent
personality disorder are particularly likely to  co-occur. Like avoidant personality disor-
der, schizoid personality disorder and schizotypal personality disorder are characterized
by social isolation. However, individuals with avoidant personality disorder want to have
relationships with others and feel their loneliness deeply, whereas those with schizoid or
schizotypal personality disorder may be conten t with and even prefer  their social isola-
tion. Paranoid personality disorder and avoida nt personality disorder are both character-
ized by a reluctance to confide in others. Ho wever, in avoidant personality disorder, this
reluctance is attributable more to a fear of being embarrassed or being found inadequate
than to a fear of others’ malicious intent.
Many individuals display avoidant personality traits. Only when these traits are in-
flexible, maladaptive, and persisting and caus e significant functional impairment or sub-
jective distress do they constitu te avoidant personality disorder.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Avoidant personality disorder
must be distinguished from personality ch ange due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge ar e attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system. 
Substance use disorders. Avoidant personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in a ssociation with persistent substance use.
Dependent Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.6 (F60.7)
A pervasive and excessive need to be taken care of that leads to submissive and clinging
behavior and fears of separation, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of
contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
1. Has difficulty making everyday decisions without an excessive amount of advice and
reassurance from others.
2. Needs others to assume responsibility for most major areas of his or her life.
3. Has difficulty expressing disagreement with others because of fear of loss of support
or approval. ( Note:  Do not include realistic fears of retribution.)
4. Has difficulty initiating projects or doing things on his or her own (because of a lack of
self-confidence in judgment or abilities rather than a lack of motivation or energy).
5. Goes to excessive lengths to obtain nurturance and support from others, to the point
of volunteering to do things that are unpleasant.
6. Feels uncomfortable or helpless when alone because of exaggerated fears of being
unable to care for himself or herself.
7. Urgently seeks another relationship as a source of care and support when a close re-
lationship ends.
8. Is unrealistically preoccupied with fears of being left to take care of himself or herself.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of dependent personalit y disorder is a pervasive and excessive need
to be taken care of that leads to submissive and clinging behavior and fears of separation.
This pattern begins by early ad ulthood and is present in a variety of contexts. The dependent
676 Personality Disorders
and submissive behaviors are designed to elicit caregiving and arise from a self-perception
of being unable to function adequately without the help of others.
Individuals with dependent personality disorder have grea t difficulty making every-
day decisions (e.g., what color shirt to wear to work or whether to carry an umbrella) without
an excessive amount of advice and reassurance from others (Criterion 1). These individu-
als tend to be passive and to allow other people  (often a single other person) to take the ini-
tiative and assume responsibility for most majo r areas of their lives (Criterion 2). Adults
with this disorder typically depend on a pa rent or spouse to decide where they should
live, what kind of job they should have, and which neighbors to befriend. Adolescents
with this disorder may allow their parent(s) to  decide what they should wear, with whom
they should associate, how they should spen d their free time, and what school or college
they should attend. This need for others to  assume responsibility goes beyond age-appro-
priate and situation-appropriate requests fo r assistance from others (e.g., the specific
needs of children, elderly persons, and hand icapped persons). Dependent personality dis-
order may occur in an individual who has a serious medical conditio n or disability, but in
such cases the difficulty in taking responsib ility must go beyond what would normally be
associated with that condition or disability.
Because they fear losing support or approval, individuals with dependent personality
disorder often have difficulty expressing d isagreement with other individuals, especially
those on whom they are dependent (Criterion 3) . These individuals feel so unable to func-
tion alone that they will agree with things that they feel are wrong rather than risk losing
the help of those to whom they look for guidance. They do not get appropriately angry at
others whose support and nurturance they need for fear of alienating them. If the individ-
ual’s concerns regarding the consequences of expressing disagreement are realistic (e.g.,
realistic fears of retribution from an abusiv e spouse), the behavior should not be consid-
ered to be evidence of dependent personality disorder.
Individuals with this disorder have difficulty initiating projects or doing things inde-
pendently (Criterion 4). They lack self-confidence and believe that they need help to begin
and carry through tasks. They will wait for othe rs to start things because they believe that
as a rule others can do them better. These in dividuals are convinced that they are incapable
of functioning independently and present them selves as inept and requiring constant as-
sistance. They are, however, lik ely to function adequately if given the assurance that some-
one else is supervising and approving. There ma y be a fear of becoming or appearing to be
more competent, because they may believe that this will lead to abandonment. Because
they rely on others to handle their problems, they often do not learn the skills of indepen-
dent living, thus perpetuating dependency.
Individuals with dependent personality disord er may go to excessive lengths to obtain
nurturance and support from others, even to  the point of volunteering for unpleasant
tasks if such behavior will bring the care they  need (Criterion 5). They are willing to submit
to what others want, even if the demands are unreasonable. Their need to maintain an im-
portant bond will often re sult in imbalanced or distorted relationships. They may make ex-
traordinary self-sacrifices or tolerate verbal, physical, or sexual abuse.  (It should be noted
that this behavior should be considered evid ence of dependent pers onality disorder only
when it can clearly be established that other options are available to the individual.) Indi-
viduals with this disorder feel uncomfortable or  helpless when alone, because of their ex-
aggerated fears of being unable to care for th emselves (Criterion 6). They will “tag along”
with important others just to avoid being alone,  even if they are not interested or involved
in what is happening.
When a close relationship ends (e.g., a breakup with a lover; the death of a caregiver), in-
dividuals with dependent person ality disorder may urgently seek another relationship to
provide the care and support they  need (Criterion 7). Their be lief that they are unable to
function in the absence of a cl ose relationship motivates these individuals to become quickly
and indiscriminately attached to  another individual. Individuals with this disorder are often
Dependent Personality Disorder 677
preoccupied with fears of being left to care fo r themselves (Criterion 8). They see themselves
as so totally dependent on the advice and help  of an important other person that they worry
about being abandoned by that person when ther e are no grounds to justify such fears. To be
considered as evidence of this criterion, the fears must be ex cessive and unrealistic. For ex-
ample, an elderly man with cancer who moves into his son’s household for care is exhibiting
dependent behavior that is appropriate given this person’s life circumstances.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with dependent personality diso rder are often charac terized by pessimism
and self-doubt, tend to belittl e their abilities and assets, and may constantly refer to them-
selves as “stupid.” They take criticism and disapproval as proof of their worthlessness and
lose faith in themselves. They may seek ov erprotection and dominance from others. Oc-
cupational functioning may be impaired if in dependent initiative is required. They may
avoid positions of responsibility and become anxious when faced with decisions. Social re-
lations tend to be limited to those few people  on whom the individual is dependent. There
may be an increased risk of depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, and adjustment dis-
orders. Dependent personality disorder often co-occurs with other personality disorders,
especially borderline, avoidant, and histrion ic personality disorders. Chronic physical ill-
ness or separation anxiety disorder in childhood or adolescence may predispose the indi-
vidual to the development of this disorder.
Prevalence
Data from the 2001–2002 National Epidemio logic Survey on Alcohol and Related Condi-
tions yielded an estimated prevalence of depe ndent personality disorder of 0.49%, and de-
pendent personality was estimated, based on a probability subsample from Part II of the
National Comorbidit y Survey Replication, to be 0.6%.
Development and Course
This diagnosis should be used with great caution,  if at all, in children and adolescents, for
whom dependent behavior may be developmentally appropriate.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The degree to which dependen t behaviors are considered to be appropriate varies sub-
stantially across different age and sociocultu ral groups. Age and cultural factors need to
be considered in evaluating the diagnostic threshold of each crit erion. Dependent behav-
ior should be considered characteristic of the disorder only when it is clearly in excess of
the individual’s cultural norms or reflects unrealistic concerns. An emphasis on passivity,
politeness, and deferential treatment is characteristic of some societies and may be mis-
interpreted as traits of dependent personality disorder. Similarly, societies may differen-
tially foster and discourage depend ent behavior in males and females. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In clinical settings, dependent personality d isorder has been diagnosed more frequently in
females, although some studies report simila r prevalence rates among males and females. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders and medical conditions. Dependent personality disorder must
be distinguished from dependen cy arising as a consequence of  other mental disorders (e.g.,
depressive disorders, panic disorder, agoraphobia) and as a resu lt of other medical conditions. 
678 Personality Disorders
Other personality disorders and personality traits. Other personality disorders may be
confused with dependent personality disorder because they ha ve certain features in com-
mon. It is therefore important to distinguis h among these disorders based on differences in
their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality features that meet cri-
teria for one or more personality disorders in addition to dependent personality disorder, all
can be diagnosed. Although many personality disorders are characterized by dependent
features, dependent personality disorder can be distinguished by its predominantly submis-
sive, reactive, and clinging be havior. Both dependent person ality disorder and borderline
personality disorder are characterized by fe ar of abandonment; however, the individual
with borderline personality disorder reacts to  abandonment with feelings of emotional emp-
tiness, rage, and demands, whereas the individual with dependent personality disorder re-
acts with increasing appeasement and submissiveness and urgently seeks a replacement
relationship to provide caregiving and suppor t. Borderline personalit y disorder can further
be distinguished from dependen t personality disorder by a ty pical pattern of unstable and
intense relationships. Individual s with histrionic personality disorder, like those with de-
pendent personality disorder, ha ve a strong need for reassu rance and approval and may ap-
pear childlike and clinging. However, unli ke dependent personality disorder, which is
characterized by self-effacing and docile behavior, histrionic personality disorder is charac-
terized by gregarious flamboyance with acti ve demands for attention. Both dependent
personality disorder and avoidant personality di sorder are characterized by feelings of in-
adequacy, hypersensitivity to criticism, and a need for reassurance; however, individuals
with avoidant personality disorder have such a strong fear of humiliation and rejection that
they withdraw until they are certain they will be accepted. In  contrast, individuals with de-
pendent personality disorder have a pattern of  seeking and maintaining connections to im-
portant others, rather than avoiding  and withdrawing fr om relationships.
Many individuals display dependent personalit y traits. Only when these traits are in-
flexible, maladaptive, and persisting and caus e significant functional impairment or sub-
jective distress do they constitute  dependent personality disorder. 
Personality change due to another medical condition. Dependent personality disor-
der must be distinguished from personality change due to another medical condition, in
which the traits that emerge ar e attributable to the effects of another medical condition on
the central nervous system.
Substance use disorders. Dependent personality disorder must also be distinguished
from symptoms that may develop in a ssociation with persistent substance use.
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 301.4 (F60.5)
A pervasive pattern of preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and in-
terpersonal control, at the expense of flexibility, openness, and efficiency, beginning by
early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by four (or more) of the
following:
1. Is preoccupied with details, rules, lists, order, organization, or schedules to the extent
that the major point of the activity is lost.
2. Shows perfectionism that interferes with task completion (e.g., is unable to complete a
project because his or her own over ly strict standards are not met).
3. Is excessively devoted to work and productivity to the exclusion of leisure activities and
friendships (not accounted for by obvious economic necessity).
4. Is overconscientious, scrupulous, and inflexible about matters of morality, ethics, or
values (not accounted for by cultural or religious identification).
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder 679
5. Is unable to discard worn-out or worthless objects even when they have no sentimental
value.
6. Is reluctant to delegate tasks or to work with others unless they submit to exactly his
or her way of doing things.
7. Adopts a miserly spending style toward both self and others; money is viewed as
something to be hoarded for future catastrophes.
8. Shows rigidity and stubbornness.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of obse ssive-compulsive personality disorder is a preoccupation
with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and interpersonal control, at the expense of
flexibility, openness, and efficiency. This patt ern begins by early adulthood and is present
in a variety of contexts.
Individuals with obse ssive-compulsive personality disorder attempt to maintain a
sense of control through painstaking attention to rules, trivial details, procedures, lists,
schedules, or form to the extent that the major point of the activity is lost (Criterion 1). They
are excessively careful and prone to repetiti on, paying extraordinary attention to detail
and repeatedly checking for possible mistakes. They are oblivious to the fact that other
people tend to become very annoyed at the de lays and inconveniences that result from this
behavior. For example, when such individuals misplace a list of things to be done, they
will spend an inordinate amount  of time looking for the list  rather than spending a few
moments re-creating it from memory and proceeding to accomplish the tasks. Time is
poorly allocated, and the most important tasks are left to the last moment. The perfection-
ism and self-imposed high standards of performance cause significant dysfunction and
distress in these individuals. They may beco me so involved in maki ng every detail of a
project absolutely perfect that the project is never finished (Criterion 2). For example, the
completion of a written report is delayed by  numerous time-consuming rewrites that all
come up short of “perfection.” Deadlines are missed, and aspects of the individual’s life
that are not the current focus of activity may fall into disarray.
Individuals with obsessive-compulsive pers onality disorder display excessive devotion
to work and productivity to th e exclusion of leisure activities and friendships (Criterion 3).
This behavior is not accounted for by economic necessity. They often f eel that they do not
have time to take an evening or a weekend day of f to go on an outing or to just relax. They
may keep postponing a pleasurable activity, such as a vacation, so that it may never occur.
When they do take time for leisure activities or vacations, they are very uncomfortable un-
less they have taken along some thing to work on so they do not “waste time.” There may be
a great concentration on househ old chores (e.g., repeated excessive cleaning so that “one
could eat off the floor”). If they spend time with friends, it is likely to be in some kind of for-
mally organized activity (e.g., sports). Hobbies  or recreational activities are approached as
serious tasks requiring careful organization and hard work to master. The emphasis is on
perfect performance. These individuals turn play  into a structured task (e.g., correcting an
infant for not putting ring s on the post in the right order; tell ing a toddler to ride his or her tri-
cycle in a straight line; turning a baseball game into a harsh “lesson”).
Individuals with obsessive-co mpulsive personality disord er may be excessively con-
scientious, scrupulous, and infl exible about matters of moralit y, ethics, or values (Crite-
rion 4). They may force themselves and othe rs to follow rigid moral principles and very
strict standards of performance. They may al so be mercilessly self-c ritical about their own
mistakes. Individuals with this disorder are rigidly deferential to authority and rules and
insist on quite literal compliance, with no ru le bending for extenuating circumstances. For
example, the individual will not lend a quarte r to a friend who needs one to make a tele-
phone call because “neither a borrower nor a le nder be” or because it  would be “bad” for
680 Personality Disorders
the person’s character. These qualities should not be accounted for by the individual’s cul-
tural or religious identification.
Individuals with this disorder may be unable to discard worn-out or worthless objects,
even when they have no sentimental value (C riterion 5). Often these individuals will ad-
mit to being “pack rats.” They regard discar ding objects as wastef ul because “you never
know when you might need something” and will become upset if someone tries to get rid of
the things they have saved. Their spouses or roommates may complain about the amount of
space taken up by old parts, magazines, broken appliances, and so on. 
Individuals with obsessive-compulsive pers onality disorder are reluctant to delegate
tasks or to work with others (Criterion 6). They stubbornly and unreasonably insist that
everything be done their way and that people  conform to their way of doing things. They
often give very detaile d instructions about how things should be done (e.g., there is one
and only one way to mow the lawn, wash the dishes, build a doghouse) and are surprised
and irritated if others suggest creative alternat ives. At other times they may reject offers of
help even when behind schedule because th ey believe no one else can do it right.
Individuals with this disorder may be miserly and stingy and maintain a standard of
living far below what they can afford, believing that spending must be tightly controlled to
provide for future catastrophes (Criterion 7) . Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder
is characterized by rigidity and stubbornness (Criterion 8). Individuals with this disorder
are so concerned about having things done the one “correct” way that they have trouble
going along with anyone else’s ideas. These individuals plan ahead in meticulous detail
and are unwilling to consider changes. Totally  wrapped up in their own perspective, they
have difficulty acknowledging the viewpoints of others. Friends and colleagues may be-
come frustrated by this constant rigidity. Even when individuals with obsessive-compul-
sive personality disorder recognize that it may be in their interest to compromise, they
may stubbornly refuse to do  so, arguing that it is “t he principle of the thing.”
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
When rules and established procedures do not dictate the correct answer, decision making
may become a time-consuming, often painfu l process. Individuals with obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder may have such difficulty deciding which tasks take pri-
ority or what is the best way of doing some pa rticular task that they may never get started
on anything. They are prone to become upset or angry in situations in which they are not
able to maintain control of their physical or interpersonal environment, although the an-
ger is typically not expressed di rectly. For example, an individual may be angry when ser-
vice in a restaurant is poor, but instead of complaining to the management, the individual
ruminates about how much to leave as a tip. On other occasions, anger may be expressed
with righteous indignation over a seemingly minor matter. Individuals with this disorder
may be especially attentive to their relative  status in dominance-submission relationships
and may display excessive deference to an au thority they respect and excessive resistance
to authority they do not respect.
Individuals with this disorder usually expres s affection in a highly  controlled or stilted
fashion and may be very uncomfortable in the presence of others who are emotionally ex-
pressive. Their everyday relationships have a formal and serious quality, and they may be
stiff in situations in which others would smile  and be happy (e.g., greeting a lover at the
airport). They carefully hold th emselves back until they are sure that whatever they say
will be perfect. They may be preoccupied with  logic and intellect, and intolerant of affec-
tive behavior in others. They often have diffi culty expressing tender feelings, rarely pay-
ing compliments. Individuals with this disord er may experience occupational difficulties
and distress, particularly when confronted with new situat ions that demand flexibility
and compromise.
Individuals with anxiety disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder, social anx-
iety disorder (social phobia), and specific pho bias, and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder 681
have an increased likelihood of having a person ality disturbance that meets criteria for ob-
sessive-compulsive personality disorder. Even so , it appears that the majority of individ-
uals with OCD do not have a pattern of behavior that meets criteria for this personality
disorder. Many of the features  of obsessive-compulsive pers onality disorder overlap with
“type A” personality characteristics (e.g., pr eoccupation with work, competitiveness, time
urgency), and these features may be present in  people at risk for myocardial infarction.
There may be an association between obsessiv e-compulsive personality disorder and de-
pressive and bipolar disorders and eating disorders.
Prevalence
Obsessive-compulsive personalit y disorder is one of the mo st prevalent personality dis-
orders in the general population, with estimated prevalence ranging from 2.1% to 7.9%. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In assessing an individual for obsessive-com pulsive personality disorder, the clinician
should not include those behaviors that reflect habits, customs, or interpersonal styles that
are culturally sanctioned by the individual’s  reference group. Certain cultures place sub-
stantial emphasis on work and productivity; the resulting behaviors in members of those
societies need not be considered indications of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
In systematic studies, obsessiv e-compulsive personality disord er appears to be diagnosed
about twice as often among males.
Differential Diagnosis
Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Despite the similarity in names, OCD is usually easily
distinguished from obsessive-comp ulsive personality disorder by  the presence of true ob-
sessions and compulsions in OCD. When crit eria for both obsessive-compulsive person-
ality disorder and OCD are met, bo th diagnoses should be recorded.
Hoarding disorder. A diagnosis of hoarding disorder should be considered especially
when hoarding is extreme (e.g., accumulated st acks of worthless objects present a fire haz-
ard and make it difficult for others to walk through the house). When criteria for both ob-
sessive-compulsive personality disorder and ho arding disorder are met, both diagnoses
should be recorded. 
Other personality disorder s and personality traits. Other personality disorders may
be confused with obsessive-compulsive person ality disorder because they have certain
features in common. It is, therefore, important to distingu ish among these disorders based
on differences in their characteristic features. However, if an individual has personality
features that meet criteria for one or more personality disorders in addition to obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder, all can be diagnosed. Individuals with narcissistic per-
sonality disorder may also profess a commitmen t to perfectionism and believe that others
cannot do things as well, but these individuals are more likely to believe that they have
achieved perfection, whereas those with obse ssive-compulsive personality disorder are
usually self-critical. Individuals with narcissi stic or antisocial personality disorder lack
generosity but will indulge themselves, wher eas those with obsessive-compulsive person-
ality disorder adopt a miserly spending style toward both self and others. Both schizoid
personality disorder and obsessive-compulsive  personality disorder may be characterized
by an apparent formality and social detachme nt. In obsessive-compulsive personality dis-
order, this stems from discomfort with emot ions and excessive devotion to work, whereas
in schizoid personality disorder there is a fundamental lack of capacity for intimacy.
682 Personality Disorders
Obsessive-compulsive personality traits in moderation may be espe cially adaptive, par-
ticularly in situations that reward high perfor mance. Only when these traits are inflexible,
maladaptive, and persisting and cause significa nt functional impairment or subjective dis-
tress do they constitute obsessive-compulsive personality disorder.
Personality change due to another medical condition. Obsessive-compulsive person-
ality disorder must be distin guished from personality change due to another medical con-
dition, in which the traits emerge attributable to the effects of another medical condition
on the central nervous system.
Substance use disorders. Obsessive-compulsive personality disorder must also be dis-
tinguished from symptoms that may develop in  association with persistent substance use.
Other Personality Disorders
Personality Change
 Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria 310.1 (F07.0)
A. A persistent personality disturbance that represents a change from the individual’s pre-
vious characteristic personality pattern.
Note:  In children, the disturbance involves a marked deviation from normal devel-
opment or a significant change in the child’s usual behavior patterns, lasting at least
1 year.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition. 
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (including another
mental disorder due to another medical condition).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
Labile type:  If the predominant feature is affective lability.
Disinhibited type:  If the predominant feature is poor impulse control as evidenced by
sexual indiscretions, etc.
Aggressive type:  If the predominant feature is aggressive behavior.
Apathetic type:  If the predominant feature is marked apathy and indifference.
Paranoid type:  If the predominant feature is suspiciousness or paranoid ideation.
Other type: If the presentation is not characterized by any of the above subtypes.
Combined type:  If more than one feature predominates in the clinical picture.
Unspecified type
Coding note:  Include the name of the other medical condition (e.g., 310.1 [F07.0] person-
ality change due to temporal lobe epilepsy). The other medical condition should be coded
and listed separately immediately before the personality disorder due to another medical
condition (e.g., 345.40 [G40.209] temporal lobe epilepsy; 310.1 [F07.0] personality
change due to temporal lobe epilepsy).
Personality Change Due to Another Medical Condition 683
Subtypes
The particular personality change can be sp ecified by indicating the symptom presenta-
tion that predominates in the clinical presentation.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of a personality change due to another medical condition is a persis-
tent personality disturbance that is judged to  be due to the direct pathophysiological ef-
fects of a medical condition. The personality disturbance represents a change from the
individual’s previous characteristic personalit y pattern. In children , this condition may be
manifested as a marked deviat ion from normal development rather than as a change in a
stable personality pattern (Criterion A). There must be evidence from the history, physical
examination, or laboratory findings that the personality change is the direct physiological
consequence of another medical condition (Crite rion B). The diagnosis is not given if the
disturbance is better explained by another ment al disorder (Criterion C). The diagnosis is
not given if the disturbance occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium (Criterion
D). The disturbance must also ca use clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion E).
Common manifestations of the personality change include affective instability, poor
impulse control, ou tbursts of aggression or rage grossly out of proportion to any precipi-
tating psychosocial stressor, marked apathy , suspiciousness, or paranoid ideation. The
phenomenology of the change is indicated using the subtypes listed in the criteria set. An
individual with the disorder is often characte rized by others as “not himself [or herself].”
Although it shares the term “personality” with  the other personality disorders, this diag-
nosis is distinct by virtue of its specific et iology, different phenome nology, and more vari-
able onset and course.
The clinical presentation in a given individual may depend on the nature and localiza-
tion of the pathological process. For example, injury to the frontal lobes may yield symp-
toms such as lack of judgment or foresight, facetiousness, disinhibition, and euphoria.
Right hemisphere strokes have often been shown to evoke personal ity changes in asso-
ciation with unilateral spatial neglect, anos ognosia (i.e., inability of the individual to
recognize a bodily or functional deficit, such as the existence of hemiparesis), motor im-
persistence, and other ne urological deficits.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A variety of neurological and other medica l conditions may cause personality changes,
including central nervous system neoplasm s, head trauma, cerebrovascular disease,
Huntington’s disease, epilepsy, infectious conditions with central nervous system in-
volvement (e.g., HIV), endocrine conditions (e.g., hypothyroidism, hypo- and hyperadre-
nocorticism), and autoimmune conditions with central nerv ous system involvement (e.g.,
systemic lupus erythematosus). The associat ed physical examination findings, laboratory
findings, and patterns of preval ence and onset reflec t those of the neurological or other
medical condition involved.
Differential Diagnosis
Chronic medical conditions associ ated with pain and disability. Chronic medical con-
ditions associated with pain and disability can also be associated with changes in person-
ality. The diagnosis of personality change du e to another medical condition is given only
if a direct pathophysiological mechanism can be established. This diagnosis is not given if
the change is due to a behavioral or psycholo gical adjustment or response to another med-
ical condition (e.g., dependent behaviors that result from a need for the assistance of others
following a severe head trauma, card iovascular disease , or dementia). 
684 Personality Disorders
Delirium or major neurocognitive disorder. Personality change is a frequently associated
feature of a delirium or major neurocognitive disorder. A separate diagnosis of personal-
ity change due to another medical condition is not given if the change occurs exclusively
during the course of a delirium. However, the diagnosis of personality change due to an-
other medical condition may be given in additi on to the diagnosis of major neurocognitive
disorder if the personality change is a prom inent part of the clinical presentation.
Another mental disorder due to another medical condition. The diagnosis of person-
ality change due to another medical condition is not given if the disturbance is better ex-
plained by another mental disorder due to another medical condition (e.g., depressive
disorder due to brain tumor).
Substance use disorders. Personality changes may also occur in the context of substance
use disorders, especially if the disorder is long -standing. The clinician should inquire carefully
about the nature and extent of substance use. If th e clinician wishes to indicate an etiological re-
lationship between the personality change and su bstance use, the unspecified category for the
specific substance (e.g., unspecified st imulant-related disorder) can be used.
Other mental disorders. Marked personality changes may also be an associated feature
of other mental disorders (e.g., schizophrenia ; delusional disorder; depressive and bipolar
disorders; other specified and unspecified disruptive behavior, impulse-control, and con-
duct disorders; panic disorder). However, in these disorders, no specific physiological fac-
tor is judged to be et iologically related to the personality change.
Other personality disorders. Personality change due to another medical condition can
be distinguished from a persona lity disorder by the requirement for a clinically significant
change from baseline personality functioning and the presence of a specific etiological
medical condition.
Other Specified Personality Disorder
301.89 (F60.89)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a personality
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the personality disorders diagno stic class. The other specified personality
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the
specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any specific personality
disorder. This is done by recording “other specified personality disorder” followed by the
specific reason (e.g., “mixed personality features”).
Unspecified Personality Disorder
301.9 (F60.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a personality
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the personality disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified personality
disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the rea-
son that the criteria are not met for a specific personality disorder, and includes presenta-
tions in which there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis.