87Schizophrenia Spectrum and
Other Psychotic Disorders
Schizophrenia spectrum  and other psychotic disorders include schizophrenia,
other psychotic disorders, and schizotypal (per sonality) disorder. They are defined by ab-
normalities in one or more of the following fi ve domains: delusions, hallucinations, disor-
ganized thinking (speech), grossly disorganiz ed or abnormal moto r behavior (including
catatonia), and negative symptoms.
Key Features That Define the Psychotic Disorders
Delusions
Delusions  are fixed beliefs that are not amenable to  change in light of conflicting evidence.
Their content may include a variety of themes (e.g., persecutory, referential, somatic, reli-
gious, grandiose). Persecutory delusions  (i.e., belief that one is going to be harmed, harassed,
and so forth by an individual, organizat ion, or other group) are most common. Referential
delusions  (i.e., belief that certain gestures, comm ents, environmental cues, and so forth are
directed at oneself) are also common. Grandiose delusions  (i.e., when an individual believes
that he or she has exceptional abilities, wealth, or fame) and erotomanic delusions  (i.e., when
an individual believes falsely that another person  is in love with him or her) are also seen.
Nihilistic delusions  involve the conviction that a ma jor catastrophe will occur, and somatic
delusions  focus on preoccupations regarding health and organ function.
Delusions are deemed bizarre  if they are clearly implausible and not understandable to
same-culture peers and do not derive from or dinary life experiences.  An example of a bi-
zarre delusion is the belief that an outside forc e has removed his or her internal organs and
replaced them with someone else’s organs wi thout leaving any wounds or scars. An ex-
ample of a nonbizarre delusion is the belief that  one is under surveilla nce by the police, de-
spite a lack of convincing evidence. Delusion s that express a loss of control over mind or
body are generally considered to be bizarre; these include th e belief that one’s thoughts
have been “removed” by some outside force (thought withdrawal ), that alien thoughts have
been put into one’s mind ( thought insertion ), or that one’s body or actions are being acted on
or manipulated by so me outside force ( delusions of control ). The distinction between a de-
lusion and a strongly held idea is sometimes di fficult to make and depends in part on the
degree of conviction with which the belief is held despite clear or reasonable contradictory
evidence regarding its veracity. 
Hallucinations
Hallucinations  are perception-like experiences that occur without an external stimulus.
They are vivid and clear, with the full force and impact of normal perceptions, and not
under voluntary control. They may occur in any sensory modality, but auditory halluci-
nations are the most common in schizophrenia  and related disorders. Auditory hallucina-
tions are usually experienced as voices, whethe r familiar or unfamiliar, that are perceived
as distinct from the individual’s own though ts. The hallucinations must occur in the con-
text of a clear sensorium; those that occur while falling asleep ( hypnagogic ) or waking up
88 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
(hypnopompic ) are considered to be within the rang e of normal experience. Hallucinations
may be a normal part of religious expe rience in certain cultural contexts. 
Disorganized Thinking (Speech)
Disorganized thinking  (formal thought disorder ) is typically inferred from the individual’s
speech. The individual may switch from one topic to another ( derailment or loose associa-
tions ). Answers to questions may be oblique ly related or completely unrelated ( tangential-
ity). Rarely, speech may be so severely disorgan ized that it is nearly incomprehensible and
resembles receptive aphasia in its linguistic disorganization ( incoherence  or “word salad”).
Because mildly disorganized speech is common and nonspecific, the symptom must be se-
vere enough to substantially impair effective communication. The severity of the impair-
ment may be difficult to evaluate if the person making the diagnosis comes from a
different linguistic background than that of the person being examin ed. Less severe dis-
organized thinking or speech may occur du ring the prodromal and residual periods of
schizophrenia.
Grossly Disorganized or Abnormal Motor Behavior 
(Including Catatonia)
Grossly disorganized or abnormal motor behavior  may manifest itself in a variety of ways,
ranging from childlike “silliness” to unpred ictable agitation. Problems may be noted in
any form of goal-directed behavior, leading to difficulties in performing activities of daily
living.
Catatonic behavior  is a marked decrease in reactivity to the environment. This ranges
from resistance to  instructions ( negativism ); to maintaining a rigid, inappropriate or bi-
zarre posture; to a complete lack  of verbal and motor responses ( mutism  and stupor ). It can
also include purposeless and excessive motor activity without obvious cause ( catatonic
excitement ). Other features are repeated stereo typed movements, staring, grimacing,
mutism, and the echoing of speech. Although catatonia has historically been associated
with schizophrenia, catatonic symptoms are nonspecific and may occur in other mental
disorders (e.g., bipolar or depressive disorder s with catatonia) and in medical conditions
(catatonic disorder due to another medical condition).
Negative Symptoms
Negative symptoms  account for a substantial portion of the morbidity associated with
schizophrenia but are less prominent in other psychotic disorders. Two negative symp-
toms are particularly prominent in schizophrenia: diminished emotional expression and
avolition. Diminished emotional expression includes reductions in the expression of emo-
tions in the face, eye contact, intonation of speech (prosody), and movements of the hand,
head, and face that normally give an emotional emphasis to speech. Avolition  is a decrease
in motivated self-initiated purposeful activities. The individual may sit for long periods of
time and show little interest in  participating in work or so cial activities. Other negative
symptoms include alogia, anhedonia, and asociality. Alogia  is manifested by diminished
speech output. Anhedonia  is the decreased ability to ex perience pleasure from positive
stimuli or a degradation in the recollection of pleasure previously experienced. Asociality
refers to the apparent lack of interest in so cial interactions and may be associated with avo-
lition, but it can also be a ma nifestation of limited opportunities for social interactions. 
Disorders in This Chapter
This chapter is organized along a gradient of psychopathology. Clinicians should first con-
sider conditions that do not re ach full criteria for a psychotic disorder or are limited to one
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders 89
domain of psychopathology. Then they should  consider time-limited  conditions. Finally,
the diagnosis of a schizophrenia spectrum diso rder requires the exclusion of another con-
dition that may give rise to psychosis.
Schizotypal personality disorder  is noted within this chapter as it is considered within
the schizophrenia spectrum, although its full description is found in the chapter “Person-
ality Disorders.” The diagnosis schizotypal pers onality disorder captures a pervasive pat-
tern of social and interpersonal deficits, including reduced capacity for close relationships;
cognitive or perceptual distor tions; and eccentricities of behavior, usually beginning by
early adulthood but in some cases first becoming apparent in childhood and adolescence.
Abnormalities of beliefs, thinki ng, and perception are below the threshold for the diagno-
sis of a psychotic disorder.
Two conditions are defined by abnormalities limited to one domain of psychosis: delu-
sions or catatonia. Delusional disorder is characterized by at least 1 month of delusions but
no other psychotic symptoms. Catatonia is desc ribed later in the chapter and further in this
discussion.
Brief psychotic disorder lasts more than 1 day and remits by 1 month. Schizophreni-
form disorder is characterized by a symptomatic presentation equivalent to that of schizo-
phrenia except for its duration (less than 6 months) and the absence of a requirement for a
decline in functioning.
Schizophrenia lasts for at least 6 months an d includes at least 1 month of active-phase
symptoms. In schizoaffective disorder, a mood episode and the active-phase symptoms of
schizophrenia occur together an d were preceded or are followe d by at least 2 weeks of de-
lusions or hallucinations with out prominent mood symptoms.
Psychotic disorders may be induced by anot her condition. In substance/medication-
induced psychotic disorder, the psychotic symp toms are judged to be a physiological con-
sequence of a drug of abuse, a medication, or  toxin exposure and cease after removal of the
agent. In psychotic disorder due to anothe r medical condition, the psychotic symptoms
are judged to be a direct physiological consequence of another medical condition.
Catatonia can occur in severa l disorders, including neurod evelopmental, psychotic, bi-
polar, depressive, and other mental disorders.  This chapter also includes the diagnoses
catatonia associated with anot her mental disorder (catatonia  specifier), catatonic disorder
due to another medical condition, and unspecifie d catatonia, and the diagnostic criteria for
all three conditions are described together.
Other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disor-
ders are included for classifyin g psychotic presentations that do not meet the criteria for
any of the specific psychotic disorders, or  psychotic symptomatology about which there is
inadequate or contra dictory information.
Clinician-Rated Assessment of Symptoms and
 Related Clinical Phenomena in Psychosis
Psychotic disorders are heterogeneous, and th e severity of symptoms can predict impor-
tant aspects of the illness, such as the degree of cognitive or neur obiological deficits. To
move the field forward, a detailed framework fo r the assessment of severity is included in
Section III “Assessment Measures,” which may help with treatment planning, prognostic
decision making, and research on patho physiological mechanisms. Section III “Assess-
ment Measures” also contains dimensional as sessments of the primary symptoms of psy-
chosis, including hallucinations, delusions, disorganized speech (except for substance/
medication-induced psychotic disorder and psychotic disorder due to another medical
condition), abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative symptoms, as well as dimen-
sional assessments of depression and mania. Th e severity of mood symptoms in psychosis
has prognostic value  and guides treatment. There is growing evidence that schizoaffective
90 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
disorder is not a distinct nosological catego ry. Thus, dimensional assessments of depres-
sion and mania for all psychotic disorders alert clinicians to mood pathology and the need
to treat where appropriate. The Section III sc ale also includes a dimensional assessment of
cognitive impairment. Many individuals with psychotic disorders have impairments in a
range of cognitive domains that predict functi onal status. Clinical neuropsychological as-
sessment can help guide diagnosis and treatm ent, but brief assessments without formal
neuropsychological assessment can provide us eful information that can be sufficient for
diagnostic purposes. Formal neuropsychological  testing, when conducted, should be ad-
ministered and scored by personnel trained in  the use of testing instruments. If a formal
neuropsychological assessment is not conducted, the clinician should use the best avail-
able information to make a judgment. Furthe r research on these assessments is necessary
in order to determine their c linical utility; thus, the assessments available in Section III
should serve as a prototype to  stimulate such research.
Schizotypal (Personality) Disorder
Criteria and text for schizotypal personality disorder can be found in the chapter “Person-
ality Disorders.” Because this disorder is cons idered part of the schizophrenia spectrum of
disorders, and is labeled in this section of ICD-9 and ICD-10 as schizotypal disorder, it is
listed in this chapter and disc ussed in detail in the DSM-5 chapter “Personality Disorders.”
Delusional Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 297.1 (F22)
A. The presence of one (or more) delusions with a duration of 1 month or longer.
B. Criterion A for schizophrenia has never been met. 
Note:  Hallucinations, if present, are not prominent and are related to the delusional
theme (e.g., the sensation of being infested with insects associated with delusions of
infestation).
C. Apart from the impact of the delusion(s) or  its ramifications, functioning is not markedly
impaired, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd.
D. If manic or major depressive episodes have occurred, these have been brief relative
to the duration of the delusional periods.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or an-
other medical condition and is not better ex plained by another mental disorder, such
as body dysmorphic disorder or obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Specify whether:
Erotomanic type:  This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion is that
another person is in love with the individual.
Grandiose type:  This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion is the
conviction of having some great (but unrecognized) talent or insight or having made
some important discovery.
Jealous type:  This subtype applies when the central theme of the individual’s delusion
is that his or her spouse or lover is unfaithful.
Persecutory type: This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion in-
volves the individual’s belief that he or she is being conspired against, cheated, spied
on, followed, poisoned or drugged, maliciously maligned, harassed, or obstructed in
the pursuit of long-term goals.
Somatic type:  This subtype applies when the central theme of the delusion involves
bodily functions or sensations.
Delusional Disorder 91
Mixed type: This subtype applies when no one delusional theme predominates.
Unspecified type: This subtype applies when the dominant delusional belief cannot
be clearly determined or is not described in the specific types (e.g., referential delu-
sions without a prominent persecutory or grandiose component). 
Specify if:
With bizarre content:  Delusions are deemed bizarre if they are clearly implausible, not
understandable, and not derived from ordinary li fe experiences (e.g., an individual’s be-
lief that a stranger has removed his or her internal organs and replaced them with some-
one else’s organs without leaving any wounds or scars).
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder:
First episode, currentl y in acute episode:  First manifestation of the disorder meet-
ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time pe-
riod in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
First episode, currently in partial remission:  Partial remission  is a time period dur-
ing which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the de-
fining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission:  Full remission  is a period of time after a
previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
Multiple episodes, curr ently in acute episode
Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous:  Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are
remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods be-
ing very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-
havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note:  Diagnosis of delusional disorder can be made without using this severity specifier.
Subtypes
In erotomanic type,  the central theme of the delusion is that another person is in love with
the individual. The person about whom this conviction is held is usually of higher status
(e.g., a famous individual or a superior at work) but can be a complete stranger. Efforts to
contact the object of the delusion are common. In grandiose type, the central theme of the de-
lusion is the conviction of having some great talent or insight or of having made some im-
portant discovery. Less commo nly, the individual may have  the delusion of having a
special relationship with a prominent individu al or of being a prominent person (in which
case the actual individual may be regarded as an impostor). Grandiose delusions may
have a religious content. In jealous type,  the central theme of the delusion is that of an un-
faithful partner. This belief is arrived at with out due cause and is based on incorrect infer-
ences supported by small bits of “evidence”  (e.g., disarrayed clothing). The individual
with the delusion usually conf ronts the spouse or lover and at tempts to intervene in the
imagined infidelity. In persecutory type,  the central theme of the delusion involves the in-
92 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
dividual’s belief of being conspired against,  cheated, spied on, followed, poisoned, mali-
ciously maligned, harassed, or obstructed in the pursuit of long-term goals. Small slights
may be exaggerated and become the focus of a delusional system. The affected individual
may engage in repeated attempts to obtain sat isfaction by legal or legislative action. Indi-
viduals with persecutory delusions are often resentful and angry and may resort to vio-
lence against those they believe are hurting them. In somatic type,  the central theme of the
delusion involves bodily functi ons or sensations. Somatic de lusions can occur in several
forms. Most common is the belief that the indi vidual emits a foul odor ; that there is an in-
festation of insects on or in the skin; that ther e is an internal parasite; that certain parts of
the body are misshapen or ugly; or that parts of the body are not functioning.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of delusional disorder is the presence of one or more delusions that
persist for at least 1 month (Criterion A). A diagnosis of delusional disorder is not given if
the individual has ever had a symptom presen tation that met Criterion A for schizophre-
nia (Criterion B). Apart from the direct impact  of the delusions, impairments in psychoso-
cial functioning may be more circumscribed th an those seen in other psychotic disorders
such as schizophrenia, and behavior is not obviously bizarre or odd (Criterion C). If mood
episodes occur concurrently with the delusions , the total duration of these mood episodes
is brief relative to the total duration of the delusional periods (Criterion D). The delusions
are not attributable  to the physiological effects of a su bstance (e.g., cocaine) or another
medical condition (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease) and are not better explained by another men-
tal disorder, such as body dy smorphic disorder or obsessive- compulsive disorder (Crite-
rion E).
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mani a symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the va rious schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Social, marital, or work problems can result from the delusional beliefs of delusional dis-
order. Individuals with delusional disorder ma y be able to factually describe that others
view their beliefs as irrational  but are unable to accept this themselves (i.e., there may be
“factual insight” but no true  insight). Many individuals de velop irritable or dysphoric
mood, which can usually be understood as a re action to their delusional beliefs. Anger and
violent behavior can occur with persecutory, jealous, and erotomanic types. The individ-
ual may engage in litigious or antagonistic behavior (e.g., sending hundreds of letters of
protest to the government). Legal difficulties can occur, particularly in jealous and eroto-
manic types. 
Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of delusional disorder has been estimated at around 0.2%, and the
most frequent subtype is persecutory. Delu sional disorder, jealous type, is probably more
common in males than in females, but there ar e no major gender differences in the overall
frequency of delu sional disorder.
Development and Course
On average, global function is generally better than that observed in schizophrenia. Al-
though the diagnosis is generally stable, a pr oportion of individuals go on to develop
Delusional Disorder 93
schizophrenia. Delusional disorder has a significant familial relationship with both
schizophrenia and schizotypal personality diso rder. Although it can occur in younger age
groups, the condition may be more  prevalent in older individuals.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
An individual’s cultural and religious backgr ound must be taken into  account in evaluat-
ing the possible presence of delusional di sorder. The content of delusions also varies
across cultural contexts.
Functional Consequences of Delusional Disorder
The functional impairment is usually more ci rcumscribed than that seen with other psy-
chotic disorders, although in some cases, the impairment may be substantial and include
poor occupational functioning and social isola tion. When poor psychosocial functioning is
present, delusional beliefs themselves ofte n play a significant role. A common character-
istic of individuals with delusional disorder is the apparent normality of their behavior
and appearance when their delusional idea s are not being discussed or acted on. 
Differential Diagnosis
Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders. If an individual wi th obsessive-compul-
sive disorder is completely convinced that his or her obsessive-comp ulsive disorder beliefs
are true, then the diagnosis of obsessive-compulsive disorder, with absent insight/delu-
sional beliefs specifier, should be given rath er than a diagnosis of delusional disorder.
Similarly, if an individual with body dysm orphic disorder is completely convinced that
his or her body dysmorphic disorder beliefs are true, then the diagnosis of body dysmor-
phic disorder, with absent insight/delusional beliefs specifier, should be given rather than
a diagnosis of delusional disorder. 
Delirium, major neurocognitive disorder, psychotic disorder due to another medical con-
dition, and substance/medicati on-induced psychotic disorder. Individuals with these
disorders may present with symptoms that su ggest delusional disorder. For example, sim-
ple persecutory delusions in the context of major neurocognitive di sorder would be di-
agnosed as major neurocognitive  disorder, with behavioral  disturbance. A substance/
medication-induced psychotic disorder cross-sectionally may be identical in symptom-
atology to delusional disorder but can be di stinguished by the chronological relationship
of substance use to the onset and remission of the delusional beliefs.
Schizophrenia and schizophreniform disorder. Delusional disorder can be distinguished
from schizophrenia and schizophreniform disord er by the absence of the other character-
istic symptoms of the active phase of schizophrenia. 
Depressive and bipolar disorders and schizoaffective disorder. These disorders may
be distinguished from delusional disorder by  the temporal relationship between the mood
disturbance and the delusions and by the severi ty of the mood symptoms. If delusions oc-
cur exclusively during mood episodes, the diag nosis is depressive or  bipolar disorder with
psychotic features. Mood sympto ms that meet full criteria for a mood episode can be su-
perimposed on delusional disorder. Delusional di sorder can be diagnose d only if the total
duration of all mood episodes remains brief rela tive to the total duration of the delusional
disturbance. If not, then a diagnosis of othe r specified or unspecified schizophrenia spec-
trum and other psychotic diso rder accompanied by other sp ecified depressi ve disorder,
unspecified depressive disorder, other specif ied bipolar and related disorder, or unspeci-
fied bipolar and related disorder is appropriate.
94 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Brief Psychotic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 298.8 (F23)
A. Presence of one (or more) of the following symptoms. At least one of these must be
(1), (2), or (3):
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
Note: Do not include a symptom if it is a culturally sanctioned response. 
B. Duration of an episode of the disturbance is at least 1 day but less than 1 month, with
eventual full return to premorbid level of functioning.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by major depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features or another psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia or catatonia,
and is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify if:
With marked stressor(s)  (brief reactive psychosis): If symptoms occur in response to
events that, singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar
circumstances in the individual’s culture.
Without marked stressor(s): If symptoms do not occur in response to events that,
singly or together, would be markedly stressful to almost anyone in similar circum-
stances in the individual’s culture.
With postpartum onset:  If onset is during pregnancy or within 4 weeks postpartum.
Specify if:
With catatonia  (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental dis-
order, pp. 119–120, for definition)
Coding note: Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with brief
psychotic disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-
havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note:  Diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder can be made without using this severity
specifier.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of brief psychotic disorder is a disturba nce that involves the sudden
onset of at least one of the following positive psychotic symptoms: delusions, hallucina-
tions, disorganized speech (e.g., frequent de railment or incoherence), or grossly abnormal
psychomotor behavior, includin g catatonia (Criterion A). Sudden onset  is defined as
change from a nonpsychotic state to a clearly psychotic state within 2 weeks, usually with-
out a prodrome. An episode of the disturbance lasts at least 1 day but less than 1 month,
and the individual eventually has a full return  to the premorbid level of functioning (Cri-
Brief Psychotic Disorder 95
terion B). The disturbance is not better explai ned by a depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features, by schizoaffective disorder , or by schizophrenia and is not attributable
to the physiological effects of a substance (e .g., a hallucinogen) or  another medical condi-
tion (e.g., subdural hematoma) (Criterion C).
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mani a symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the va rious schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with brief psychoti c disorder typically experience  emotional turmoil or over-
whelming confusion. They may have rapid sh ifts from one intense affect to another.
Although the disturbance is brief, the level of  impairment may be severe, and supervision
may be required to ensure that nutritional and hygienic needs are met and that the indi-
vidual is protected from the consequences of poor judgment, cognitive impairment, or act-
ing on the basis of delusions. There appears to  be an increased risk of suicidal behavior,
particularly during the acute episode.
Prevalence
In the United States, brief psychotic disorder  may account for 9% of cases of first-onset
psychosis. Psychotic disturbances that meet Crit eria A and C, but not Criterion B, for brief
psychotic disorder (i.e., duration of active symptoms is 1–6 months  as opposed to remis-
sion within 1 month) are more common in developing countries than in developed coun-
tries. Brief psychotic diso rder is twofold more common in females than in males.
Development and Course
Brief psychotic disorder may appear in adolescence or early adulthood, and onset can oc-
cur across the lifespan, with the average age at onset being the mid 30s. By definition, a
diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder requir es a full remission of all symptoms and an
eventual full return to the premorbid level of functioning within 1 mont h of the onset of the
disturbance. In some individuals, the duration of psychotic symptoms may be quite brief
(e.g., a few days).
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental.  Preexisting personality disorders an d traits (e.g., schizotypal person-
ality disorder; borderline personality disorder; or traits in the psychoticism domain, such
as perceptual dysregulation, and the negative affectivity domain, such as suspiciousness)
may predispose the individual to the development of the disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
It is important to distinguish symptoms of br ief psychotic disorder from culturally sanc-
tioned response patterns. For example, in so me religious ceremonies, an individual may
report hearing voices, but these do not genera lly persist and are not perceived as abnormal
by most members of the indivi dual’s community. In addition , cultural and religious back-
ground must be taken into account when considering whether be liefs are delusional. 
Functional Consequences of  Brief Psychotic Disorder
Despite high rates of relapse, for most indivi duals, outcome is excellent in terms of social
functioning and symptomatology.
96 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions. A variety of medical disorders can manifest with psychotic
symptoms of short duration. Psychotic disorder  due to another medica l condition or a de-
lirium is diagnosed when there is evidence from  the history, physical examination, or lab-
oratory tests that the delusions or hallucinati ons are the direct physiological consequence
of a specific medical condition (e.g., Cushing’s syndrome, brain tumor) (see “Psychotic
Disorder Due to Another Medical Co ndition” later in this chapter). 
Substance-related disorders. Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder, sub-
stance-induced delirium, and substance intoxication are distinguished from brief psychotic
disorder by the fact that a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication, exposure to a toxin)
is judged to be etiologically related to the psychotic symp toms (see “Substance/Medication-
Induced Psychotic Disorder” later in this chapte r). Laboratory tests, such as a urine drug
screen or a blood alcohol level, may be helpful in making this determination, as may a care-
ful history of substance use with attention to  temporal relationships between substance in-
take and onset of the symp toms and to the nature of the substance being used.
Depressive and bipolar disorders. The diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder cannot be
made if the psychotic symptoms are better explained by a mood episode (i.e., the psychotic
symptoms occur exclusively during a full major depressive, manic, or mixed episode). 
Other psychotic disorders. If the psychotic symptoms pers ist for 1 month or longer, the
diagnosis is either schizophr eniform disorder, delusional disorder, depressive disorder
with psychotic features, bipolar disorder with psychotic fe atures, or other specified or un-
specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder, depending on the other
symptoms in the presentation. The differentia l diagnosis between brief psychotic disorder
and schizophreniform disorder is difficult wh en the psychotic symptoms have remitted be-
fore 1 month in response to successful trea tment with medication. Careful attention should
be given to the possibility that a recurrent diso rder (e.g., bipolar disorder, recurrent acute ex-
acerbations of schizophrenia) may be respon sible for any recurring  psychotic episodes.
Malingering and factitious disorders. An episode of factitious disorder, with predomi-
nantly psychological signs and symptoms, may have the appearance of brief psychotic
disorder, but in such cases there is evidence that the symptoms are intentionally produced.
When malingering involves apparently psyc hotic symptoms, there is usually evidence
that the illness is being feigned for an understandable goal.
Personality disorders. In certain individual s with personality disorders, psychosocial
stressors may precipitate brief periods of psychotic symptoms. These symptoms are usu-
ally transient and do not warrant a separate diagnosis. If psychotic symptoms persist for at
least 1 day, an additional diagnosis of br ief psychotic disorder  may be appropriate.
Schizophreniform Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 295.40 (F20.81)
A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a
1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1), (2),
or (3):
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
Schizophreniform Disorder 97
B. An episode of the disorder lasts at least 1 month but less than 6 months. When the
diagnosis must be made without waiting for recovery, it should be qualified as “provi-
sional.”
C. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have
been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic episodes have occurred
concurrently with the active-phase symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have occurred dur-
ing active-phase symptoms, they have been present for a minority of the total duration
of the active and residual periods of the illness. 
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
Specify if:
With good prognostic features:  This specifier requires the presence of at least two
of the following features: onset of prominent psychotic symptoms within 4 weeks of the
first noticeable change in usual behavior or f unctioning; confusion or perplexity; good
premorbid social and occupational functioning; and absence of blunted or flat affect.
Without good prognostic features:  This specifier is applied if two or more of the
above features have not been present.
Specify if:
With catatonia  (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disor-
der, pp. 119–120, for definition).
Coding note:  Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with schizo-
phreniform disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-
havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note:  Diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder can be made without using this severity
specifier.
Note:  For additional information on Associated Features Supp orting Diagnosis, Develop-
ment and Course (age-related factors), Culture-Related Diag nostic Issues, Gender-Related
Diagnostic Issues, Differential Diagnosis, and Comorbidity, see the corresponding sec-
tions in schizophrenia.
Diagnostic Features
The characteristic symptoms of  schizophreniform disorder are identical to those of schizo-
phrenia (Criterion A). Schizophreniform disorder is distinguish ed by its difference in du-
ration: the total duration of the illness, includ ing prodromal, active, and residual phases, is
at least 1 month but less than 6 months (Crite rion B). The duration requirement for schizo-
phreniform disorder is intermediate between th at for brief psychotic disorder, which lasts
more than 1 day and remits by 1 month, and schizophrenia, which lasts for at least 6 months.
The diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder is made under two conditions. 1) when an ep-
isode of illness lasts between 1 and 6 months and the individual has already recovered,
and 2) when an individual is symptomatic for less than the 6 months’ duration required for
the diagnosis of schizophrenia but has not yet recovered. In this case, the diagnosis should
be noted as “schizophreniform disorder (provisional)” because it is uncertain if the indi-
vidual will recover from the disturbance within  the 6-month period. If the disturbance per-
sists beyond 6 months, the diagnosis should be changed to schizophrenia.
98 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Another distinguishing feature of schizophren iform disorder is the lack of a criterion
requiring impaired social and occupational functioning. While such  impairments may po-
tentially be present, they are not necessary for a diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder. 
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mani a symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the va rious schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
As with schizophrenia, currently there are no laboratory or psychometric tests for schizo-
phreniform disorder. There are multiple brain regions where ne uroimaging, neuropa-
thological, and neurophy siological research has indicated abnormalities, but none are
diagnostic.
Prevalence
Incidence of schizophreniform disorder across sociocultural settings is likely similar to
that observed in schizophrenia. In the United States and other developed countries, the in-
cidence is low, possibly fivefold less than th at of schizophrenia. In developing countries,
the incidence may be higher, especially for th e specifier “with good prognostic features”;
in some of these settings schizophreniform disorder may be as common as schizophrenia. 
Development and Course
The development of schizophreniform disorder  is similar to that of schizophrenia. About
one-third of individuals with an initial di agnosis of schizophreniform disorder (provi-
sional) recover within the 6-mo nth period and schizophreniform disorder is their final di-
agnosis. The majority of the remaining two-th irds of individuals will eventually receive a
diagnosis of schizophrenia or  schizoaffective disorder. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Genetic and physiological. Relatives of individuals with  schizophreniform disorder
have an increased risk for schizophrenia. 
Functional Consequences of 
Schizophreniform Disorder
For the majority of individuals with schizo phreniform disorder who eventually receive a
diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, the functional consequences are
similar to the consequences of those disorder s. Most individuals ex perience dysfunction in
several areas of daily functioning, such as sc hool or work, interperso nal relationships, and
self-care. Individuals who recover from schi zophreniform disorder ha ve better functional
outcomes. 
Differential Diagnosis 
Other mental disorders and medical conditions. A wide variety of mental and medical
conditions can manifest with psychotic sympto ms that must be considered in the differ-
ential diagnosis of schizophreniform disord er. These include psychotic disorder due to
another medical condition or its treatment; delirium or major neurocognitive disorder;
substance/medication-induced psychotic diso rder or delirium; depressive or bipolar
disorder with psychotic features; schizoaffectiv e disorder; other specified or unspecified bi-
polar and related disorder; depressive or bipola r disorder with catatonic features; schizophre-
Schizophrenia 99
nia; brief psychotic disorder; delusional diso rder; other specified or  unspecified schizo-
phrenia spectrum and other psychotic diso rder; schizotypal, schizoid, or paranoid
personality disorders; autism spectrum disorder; disorders presenting in childhood with
disorganized speech; attention-deficit/hype ractivity disorder; ob sessive-compulsive dis-
order; posttraumatic stress diso rder; and traumatic brain injury.
Since the diagnostic criteria for schizophreniform disorder and schizophrenia differ
primarily in duration of illness, the discussion of the differential diagnosis of schizophre-
nia also applies to schizophreniform disorder.
Brief psychotic disorder. Schizophreniform disorder differs  in duration from brief psy-
chotic disorder, which has a duration of less than 1 month.
Schizophrenia
Diagnostic Criteria 295.90 (F20.9)
A. Two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a
1-month period (or less if successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1), (2), or (3):
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
3. Disorganized speech (e.g., frequent derailment or incoherence).
4. Grossly disorganized or catatonic behavior.
5. Negative symptoms (i.e., diminished emotional expression or avolition).
B. For a significant portion of the time since the onset of the disturbance, level of function-
ing in one or more major areas, such as work, interpersonal relations, or self-care, is
markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset (or when the onset is in childhood
or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected level of interpersonal, academic,
or occupational functioning).
C. Continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 months. This 6-month period
must include at least 1 month of symptoms (or less if successfully treated) that meet Cri-
terion A (i.e., active-phase symptoms) and may include periods of prodromal or residual
symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the signs of the disturbance may
be manifested by only negative symptoms or by two or more symptoms listed in Criterion
A present in an attenuated form (e.g., odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences).
D. Schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features
have been ruled out because either 1) no major depressive or manic episodes have
occurred concurrently with the active-phas e symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have
occurred during active-phase symptoms, they  have been present for a minority of the
total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
F. If there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of child-
hood onset, the additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delu-
sions or hallucinations, in addition to the other required symptoms of schizophrenia,
are also present for at least 1 month (or less if successfully treated).
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder
and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
First episode, currentl y in acute episode:  First manifestation of the disorder meet-
ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode is a time pe-
riod in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
100 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
First episode, currently in partial remission:  Partial remission  is a period of time
during which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the
defining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission:  Full remission is a period of time after a
previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode:  Multiple episodes may be deter-
mined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a remission and a
minimum of one relapse). 
Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous:  Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are
remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods be-
ing very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
Specify if:
With catatonia  (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder,
pp. 119–120, for definition).
Coding note:  Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with
schizophrenia to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-
havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note:  Diagnosis of schizophrenia can be made without using this severity specifier.
Diagnostic Features 
The characteristic symptoms of schizophrenia involve a range of cogn itive, behavioral, and
emotional dysfunctions, but no single sympto m is pathognomonic of the disorder. The di-
agnosis involves the recognition of a constellation of sign s and symptoms associated with
impaired occupational or social functioning. Individuals with the disorder will vary sub-
stantially on most features, as schizophrenia is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome.
At least two Criterion A symptoms must be  present for a significant portion of time
during a 1-month period or longer. At least one of these symptoms must be the clear pres-
ence of delusions (Criterion A1), hallucinati ons (Criterion A2), or disorganized speech
(Criterion A3). Grossly disorganized or ca tatonic behavior (Criterion A4) and negative
symptoms (Criterion A5) may also be present.  In those situations in which the active-
phase symptoms remit within a mo nth in response to treatment, Criterion A is still met if the
clinician estimates that they would have persisted in the absence of treatment. 
Schizophrenia involves impairment in one or more major areas of functioning (Crite-
rion B). If the disturbance begins in childhood or adolescence,  the expected level of func-
tion is not attained. Co mparing the individual with unaffected siblings may be helpful. The
dysfunction persists for a substantial period du ring the course of the disorder and does not
appear to be a direct result of any single feature. Avolition (i.e., reduced drive to pursue
goal-directed behavior; Criterion A5) is linked to the social dysfunction described under
Criterion B. There is also strong evidence for a relationship betw een cognitive impairment
(see the section “Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis” for this disorder) and func-
tional impairment in individuals with schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia 101
Some signs of the disturbance must persist for a continuous period of at least 6 months
(Criterion C). Prodromal symptoms often prec ede the active phase,  and residual symp-
toms may follow it, characterized by mild or subthreshold forms of hallucinations or
delusions. Individuals may express a variety of unusual or odd beliefs that are not of de-
lusional proportions (e.g., ideas of reference or  magical thinking); they may have unusual
perceptual experiences (e.g., sensing the pres ence of an unseen person); their speech may
be generally understandable but vague; and their behavior may be unusual but not grossly
disorganized (e.g., mumbling in public). Negative symptoms are common in the pro-
dromal and residual phases and can be seve re. Individuals who had been socially active
may become withdrawn from previous routines . Such behaviors are often the first sign of
a disorder.
Mood symptoms and full mood episodes ar e common in schizophrenia and may be con-
current with active-phase symptomatology. However, as distinct from a psychotic mood dis-
order, a schizophrenia diagnosis requires the presence of delusions or hallucinations in the
absence of mood episodes. In addition, mood ep isodes, taken in total,  should be present for
only a minority of the total duration of th e active and residual periods of the illness.
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mani a symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the va rious schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with schizophrenia may display inappropriate affect (e.g., laughing in the ab-
sence of an appropriate stimulus); a dysphoric mood that can take the form of depression,
anxiety, or anger; a disturbed sleep pattern (e.g., daytime sleeping and nighttime activity);
and a lack of interest in eating or food refu sal. Depersonalization, derealization, and so-
matic concerns may occur and sometimes reac h delusional proportions. Anxiety and pho-
bias are common. Cognitive deficits in schi zophrenia are common and are strongly linked
to vocational and functional impairments. Thes e deficits can include decrements in declar-
ative memory, working memory, language function, and other executive functions, as well
as slower processing speed. Ab normalities in sensory processing and inhibitory capacity,
as well as reductions in attention, are also  found. Some individuals with schizophrenia
show social cognition deficits, including deficits in the ability to infer the intentions of
other people (theory of mind), and may attend  to and then interpret irrelevant events or
stimuli as meaningful, perhaps leading to th e generation of explanatory delusions. These
impairments frequently persist during symptomatic remission.
Some individuals with psychosis may lack insi ght or awareness of their disorder (i.e.,
anosognosia). This lack of “insight” includes  unawareness of symptoms of schizophrenia
and may be present throughout the entire cour se of the illness. Unawareness of illness is
typically a symptom of schizophrenia itself rath er than a coping strategy. It is comparable
to the lack of awareness of neurological  deficits following brain damage, termed anoso-
gnosia.  This symptom is the most common predicto r of non-adherence to treatment, and it
predicts higher relapse rates, increased numb er of involuntary trea tments, poorer psycho-
social functioning, aggression, and a poorer course of illness. 
Hostility and aggression can be associated  with schizophrenia, although spontaneous
or random assault is uncommon. Aggression is more frequent for younger males and for
individuals with a past history of violence, non-adherenc e with treatment, substance
abuse, and impulsivity. It should be noted that the vast majority of persons with schizo-
phrenia are not aggressive and are more frequently victimized than are individuals in the
general population. 
Currently, there are no radiological, laborato ry, or psychometric tests for the disorder.
Differences are evident in multiple brain regions between groups of healthy individuals
102 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
and persons with schizophrenia, including ev idence from neuroimaging, neuropatholog-
ical, and neurophysiological studies. Differences  are also evident in cellular architecture,
white matter connectivity, and gray matter volume in a vari ety of regions such as the pre-
frontal and temporal cortices. Reduced overall brain volume has been observed, as well as
increased brain volume reduction with age. Brain volume reductions with age are more
pronounced in individuals with schizophrenia than in healthy individuals. Finally, indi-
viduals with schizophrenia appear to differ from individuals withou t the disorder in eye-
tracking and electrophysiological indices.
Neurological soft signs common in individuals with schizophrenia include impairments
in motor coordination, sensory integration, and motor sequencing of complex movements;
left-right confusion; and disinhibition of associated mo vements. In addition, minor phys-
ical anomalies of the face and limbs may occur.
Prevalence
The lifetime prevalence of schizophrenia appears to be approximately 0.3%–0.7%, al-
though there is reported variation by race/ethnicity, across countries, and by geographic
origin for immigrants and children of immigr ants. The sex ratio differs across samples and
populations: for example, an emphasis on nega tive symptoms and longer duration of dis-
order (associated with poorer outcome) show s higher incidence rates for males, whereas
definitions allowing for the inclusion of more mood symptoms and brief presentations
(associated with better outcome) show  equivalent risks for both sexes. 
Development and Course
The psychotic features of schizophrenia typically emerge between the late teens and the
mid-30s; onset prior to adolescence is rare. The peak age at onset for the first psychotic ep-
isode is in the early- to mid-20s for males and in the late-20s for females. The onset may be
abrupt or insidious, but the majority of individuals manifest a slow and gradual develop-
ment of a variety of clinically significant signs and symptoms. Half  of these individuals
complain of depressive symptoms. Earlier age at onset has traditionally been seen as a pre-
dictor of worse prognosis. However, the effect of age at onset is likely related to gender,
with males having worse premorbid adjustment, lower educational achievement, more
prominent negative symptoms and cognitiv e impairment, and in general a worse out-
come. Impaired cognition is common, and altera tions in cognition are present during de-
velopment and precede the emergence of psycho sis, taking the form of stable cognitive
impairments during adulthood. Cognitive impairments may persist when other symptoms
are in remission and contribute to the disability of the disease. 
The predictors of course and outcome are la rgely unexplained, and course and outcome
may not be reliably predicted. The course appears to be favorable in about 20% of those
with schizophrenia, and a small number of indi viduals are reported to recover completely.
However, most individuals with schizophrenia still require formal or informal daily living
supports, and many remain chronically ill, with exacerbations and remissions of active
symptoms, while others have a course of progressive deterioration.
Psychotic symptoms tend to diminish over the life course, perhaps in association with
normal age-related declines in dopamine activity. Negative symptoms are more closely re-
lated to prognosis than are positive symptoms and tend to be the most persistent. Further-
more, cognitive deficits associated with the illness may not improve over the course of the
illness.
The essential features of schizophrenia are th e same in childhood, but it is more diffi-
cult to make the diagnosis. In children, delu sions and hallucinations may be less elaborate
than in adults, and visual hallucinations are more common and should be distinguished
from normal fantasy play. Disorganized speec h occurs in many disorders with childhood
onset (e.g., autism spectrum disorder), as does  disorganized behavior (e.g., attention-deficit/
Schizophrenia 103
hyperactivity disord er). These symptoms should not be attributed to schizophrenia with-
out due consideration of the more common disorders of childhood. Childhood-onset cases
tend to resemble poor-outcome adult cases, with gradual onset and prominent negative
symptoms. Children who later receive the diag nosis of schizophrenia are more likely to
have experienced nonspecific emotional-behavioral distur bances and psychopathology,
intellectual and language alterati ons, and subtle motor delays.
Late-onset cases (i.e., onset after age 40 ye ars) are overrepresent ed by females, who
may have married. Often, the course is ch aracterized by a predom inance of psychotic
symptoms with preservation of affect and soci al functioning. Such late-onset cases can still
meet the diagnostic crit eria for schizophrenia, but it is not yet clear whether this is the
same condition as schizophrenia diagnosed prio r to mid-life (e.g., prior to age 55 years).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Season of birth has been linked to the incidence of schizophrenia, in-
cluding late winter/early spring in some locations and summer for the deficit form of the
disease. The incidence of schizophrenia and related disorders is high er for children grow-
ing up in an urban environment an d for some minority ethnic groups. 
Genetic and physiological. There is a strong contribution  for genetic factors in deter-
mining risk for schizophrenia, although most individuals who have been diagnosed with
schizophrenia have no family history of psyc hosis. Liability is conferred by a spectrum of
risk alleles, common and rare, with each allele contributing only a small fraction to the to-
tal population variance. The risk alleles identi fied to date are also associated with other
mental disorders, including bipolar disorder, depression, an d autism spectrum disorder.
Pregnancy and birth complications with hypoxia and greater paternal age are associated
with a higher risk of schizophrenia for the developing fetus. In addition, other prenatal
and perinatal adversities, including stress, in fection, malnutrition, maternal diabetes, and
other medical conditions, have been linked wi th schizophrenia. However, the vast major-
ity of offspring with these risk factors do not deve lop schizophrenia. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
Cultural and socioeconomic factors must be considered, particularly  when the individual
and the clinician do not share the same cult ural and socioeconomic background. Ideas that
appear to be delusional in one culture (e.g.,  witchcraft) may be commonly held in another.
In some cultures, visual or auditory halluci nations with a religious  content (e.g., hearing
God’s voice) are a normal part of religious experience. In addition, the assessment of dis-
organized speech may be made difficult by lin guistic variation in narrative styles across
cultures. The assessment of affect requires sens itivity to differences in  styles of emotional
expression, eye contact, and body language, wh ich vary across cultures. If the assessment
is conducted in a language that is differen t from the individual’s  primary language, care
must be taken to ensure that alogia is not rela ted to linguistic barriers. In certain cultures,
distress may take the form of hallucinations or pseudo -hallucinations and overvalued
ideas that may present clinically similar to true psychosis but are normative to the pa-
tient’s subgroup.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues 
A number of features distinguish the clinical expression of schizophrenia in females and
males. The general incidence of schizophrenia tends to be slightly lower in females, par-
ticularly among treated cases. The age at onset is later in females, with a second mid-life
peak as described earlier (see the section “D evelopment and Course” for this disorder).
Symptoms tend to be more affect-laden am ong females, and there are more psychotic
symptoms, as well as a greater propensity for psychotic symptoms to worsen in later life.
104 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Other symptom differences include less freque nt negative symptoms and disorganization.
Finally, social functioning tends to remain better preserved in females. There are, how-
ever, frequent exceptions to these general caveats. 
Suicide Risk 
Approximately 5%–6% of individuals with schizophrenia die by suicide, about 20% attempt
suicide on one or more occasions, and many mo re have significant suicidal ideation. Suicidal
behavior is sometimes in response to command  hallucinations to harm oneself or others.
Suicide risk remains high over the whole lifespan for males an d females, although it may be
especially high for younger males with comorb id substance use. Other risk factors include
having depressive symptoms or feelings of hopelessness and being unemployed, and the
risk is higher, also, in the period after a psychotic episode or hospital discharge.
Functional Consequences of Schizophrenia 
Schizophrenia is associated with significant social and occupational dysfunction. Making
educational progress and maintaining employment are frequently impaired by avolition
or other disorder manifestatio ns, even when the cognitive sk ills are sufficient for the tasks
at hand. Most individuals are employed at a lower level than their parents, and most, par-
ticularly men, do not marry or have limited social contacts outside of their family.
Differential Diagnosis 
Major depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic or catatonic features. The distinc-
tion between schizophrenia and major depre ssive or bipolar disorder with psychotic
features or with catatonia depends on the te mporal relationship between the mood distur-
bance and the psychosis, and on the severity of the depressive or manic symptoms. If de-
lusions or hallucinations occur exclusively during a major depressive or manic episode,
the diagnosis is depressive or bipolar disorder with ps ychotic features. 
Schizoaffective disorder. A diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder requires that a major
depressive or manic episode occur concurrently  with the active-phase symptoms and that
the mood symptoms be present for a majority of the total duration of the active periods.
Schizophreniform disorder an d brief psychotic disorder. These disorders are of shorter
duration than schizophrenia as specified in Cr iterion C, which requires 6 months of symp-
toms. In schizophreniform disorder, the disturbance is present less than 6 months, and in
brief psychotic disorder, symp toms are present at least 1 day but less than 1 month. 
Delusional disorder. Delusional disorder can be distinguished from schizophrenia by
the absence of the other symptoms characteristic of schizophrenia (e.g., delusions, prom-
inent auditory or visual halluc inations, disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or cata-
tonic behavior, negative symptoms).
Schizotypal personality disorder. Schizotypal personality disorder may be distinguished
from schizophrenia by subthres hold symptoms that are associ ated with persistent person-
ality features.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder. Individuals with
obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder  may present with poor or
absent insight, and the preoccupations may reach delusional proportions. But these
disorders are distinguished from schizophren ia by their prominent obsessions, compul-
sions, preoccupations with appearance or bo dy odor, hoarding, or body-focused repeti-
tive behaviors.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Posttraumatic stress disorder  may include flashbacks that
have a hallucinatory quality, and hypervigilanc e may reach paranoid proportions. But a trau-
Schizoaffective Disorder 105
matic event and characteristic symptom features relating to reliving or reacting to the event
are required to make the diagnosis. 
Autism spectrum disorder or communication disorders. These disorders may also have
symptoms resembling a psychotic episode but are distinguished by their respective defi-
cits in social interaction with repetitive an d restricted behaviors and other cognitive and
communication deficits. An individual with autism spectrum disord er or communication
disorder must have symptoms that meet fu ll criteria for schizophrenia, with prominent
hallucinations or delusions for at least 1 mont h, in order to be diagnosed with schizophre-
nia as a comorbid condition.
Other mental disorders associated with a psychotic episode. The diagnosis of schizo-
phrenia is made only when the psychotic episode  is persistent and not attributable to the
physiological effects of a subs tance or another medical condit ion. Individuals with a de-
lirium or major or minor neurocognitive disorder may present with psychotic symptoms,
but these would have a temporal relationship to the onset of cognit ive changes consistent
with those disorders. Individuals with subs tance/medication-induced psychotic disorder
may present with symptoms char acteristic of Criterion A for schizophrenia, but the sub-
stance/medication-induced psyc hotic disorder can usually be distinguished by the chron-
ological relationship of subs tance use to the onset and remi ssion of the psychosis in the
absence of substance use. 
Comorbidity 
Rates of comorbidity with substance-relate d disorders are high in schizophrenia. Over
half of individuals with schizophrenia have  tobacco use disorder and smoke cigarettes
regularly. Comorbidity with anxiety disorder s is increasingly recognized in schizophre-
nia. Rates of obsessive-compulsive disorder and panic disorder are elevated in individuals
with schizophrenia compared with the general population. Schizotypal or paranoid per-
sonality disorder may sometimes pr ecede the onset of schizophrenia.
Life expectancy is reduced in individual s with schizophrenia because of associated
medical conditions. Weight gain, diabetes, metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular and
pulmonary disease are more common in schi zophrenia than in the general population.
Poor engagement in health maintenance behavi ors (e.g., cancer screening, exercise) in-
creases the risk of chronic disease, but other disorder factors, including medications, life-
style, cigarette smoking, and diet, may also  play a role. A shared vulnerability for
psychosis and medical disorders may explain so me of the medical comorbidity of schizo-
phrenia. 
Schizoaffective Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. An uninterrupted period of illness during which there is a major mood episode (major
depressive or manic) concurrent with Criterion A of schizophrenia.
Note:  The major depressive episode must include Criterion A1: Depressed mood.
B. Delusions or hallucinations for 2 or more weeks in the absence of a major mood epi-
sode (depressive or manic) during the lifetime duration of the illness. 
C. Symptoms that meet criteria for a major mood episode are present for the majority of
the total duration of the active and residual portions of the illness.
D. The disturbance is not attributable to the effects of a substance (e.g., a drug of abuse,
a medication) or another medical condition.
106 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Specify whether:
295.70 (F25.0)  Bipolar type:  This subtype applies if a manic episode is part of the pre-
sentation. Major depressive episodes may also occur.
295.70 (F25.1)  Depressive type:  This subtype applies if only major depressive epi-
sodes are part of the presentation.
Specify if:
With catatonia  (refer to the criteria for catatonia associated with another mental disorder,
pp. 119–120, for definition).
Coding note:  Use additional code 293.89 (F06.1) catatonia associated with
schizoaffective disorder to indicate the presence of the comorbid catatonia.
Specify if:
The following course specifiers are only to be used after a 1-year duration of the disorder
and if they are not in contradiction to the diagnostic course criteria.
First episode, currentl y in acute episode:  First manifestation of the disorder meet-
ing the defining diagnostic symptom and time criteria. An acute episode  is a time pe-
riod in which the symptom criteria are fulfilled.
First episode, currently in partial remission:  Partial remission  is a time period dur-
ing which an improvement after a previous episode is maintained and in which the de-
fining criteria of the disorder are only partially fulfilled.
First episode, currently in full remission:  Full remission is a period of time after a
previous episode during which no disorder-specific symptoms are present.
Multiple episodes, currently in acute episode:  Multiple episodes may be deter-
mined after a minimum of two episodes (i.e., after a first episode, a remission and a
minimum of one relapse). 
Multiple episodes, currently in partial remission
Multiple episodes, currently in full remission
Continuous:  Symptoms fulfilling the diagnostic symptom criteria of the disorder are
remaining for the majority of the illness course, with subthreshold symptom periods be-
ing very brief relative to the overall course.
Unspecified
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, abnormal psychomotor be-
havior, and negative symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current
severity (most severe in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present)
to 4 (present and severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom
Severity in the chapter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note:  Diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder can be made without using this severity
specifier.
Note:  For additional information on Developmen t and Course (age-related factors), Risk
and Prognostic Factors (environmental risk factors), Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues,
and Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues, see th e corresponding sections in schizophrenia,
bipolar I and II disorders, an d major depressive disorder in their respective chapters.
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder is based on the assessment of an uninterrupted
period of illness during which the individual co ntinues to display active or residual symp-
toms of psychotic illness. The diagnosis is usually, but not necessarily, made during the
period of psychotic illness. At some time during the period, Criterion A for schizophrenia
Schizoaffective Disorder 107
has to be met. Criteria B (soc ial dysfunction) and F (exclusion  of autism sp ectrum disorder
or other communication disorder of childhood onset) for schizophrenia do not have to be
met. In addition to meeting Criterion A for schizophrenia, there is a major mood episode
(major depressive or manic) (Criterion A for schizoaffective disorder). Because loss of in-
terest or pleasure is common in schizophrenia,  to meet Criterion A for schizoaffective dis-
order, the major depressive episode must in clude pervasive depressed mood (i.e., the
presence of markedly diminished interest or pleasure is not sufficie nt). Episodes of de-
pression or mania are present for the majority of  the total duration of the illness (i.e., after
Criterion A has been met) (Criterion C for schi zoaffective disorder). To separate schizoaf-
fective disorder from a depressive or bipola r disorder with psychotic features, delusions
or hallucinations must be present for at least  2 weeks in the absence of a major mood epi-
sode (depressive or manic) at some point duri ng the lifetime duration  of the illness (Cri-
terion B for schizoaffective disorder). The symptoms must not be attributable to the effects
of a substance or another medical condition (Criterion D for schi zoaffective disorder).
Criterion C for schizoaf fective disorder specifies that mood symptoms meeting criteria
for a major mood episode must be present for the majority of the total duration of the ac-
tive and residual portion of the illness. Criter ion C requires the asses sment of mood symp-
toms for the entire course of a psychotic illnes s, which differs from th e criterion in DSM-IV,
which required only an assessment of the curr ent period of illness. If the mood symptoms
are present for only a relative ly brief period, the diagnosis is schizophrenia, not schizoaf-
fective disorder. When deciding whether an individual’s presentation meets Criterion C,
the clinician should review the total duration of psychotic illness (i.e., both active and re-
sidual symptoms) and determine when significa nt mood symptoms (untreated or in need
of treatment with antidepressant and/or mo od-stabilizing medication) accompanied the
psychotic symptoms. This determination requir es sufficient histor ical information and
clinical judgment. For example, an individual with a 4-year history of active and residual
symptoms of schizophrenia develops depressi ve and manic episodes that, taken together,
do not occupy more than 1 year during the 4- year history of psycho tic illness. This presen-
tation would not meet Criterion C.
In addition to the five symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mani a symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the va rious schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Occupational functioning is frequently impair ed, but this is not a defining criterion (in
contrast to schizophrenia). Restricted social contact and difficulties with self-care are as-
sociated with schizoaffective disorder, but negative symptoms  may be less severe and less
persistent than those seen in schizophrenia. Anosognosia (i.e., poor insight) is also com-
mon in schizoaffective disorder, but the deficits in insight may be less severe and perva-
sive than those in schizophrenia. Individual s with schizoaffective disorder may be at
increased risk for later developing episodes of  major depressive disorder or bipolar disor-
der if mood symptoms contin ue following the remission of symptoms meeting Criterion A
for schizophrenia. There may be associated al cohol and other substance-related disorders. 
There are no tests or biological measures that can assist in making the diagnosis of
schizoaffective disorder. Whether schizoaffe ctive disorder differs from schizophrenia
with regard to associated features such as structural or function al brain abnormalities,
cognitive deficits, or geneti c risk factors is not clear.
Prevalence
Schizoaffective disorder appe ars to be about one-third as common as schizophrenia. Life-
time prevalence of schizoaffective disorder  is estimated to be 0.3%. The incidence of
108 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
schizoaffective disorder is higher  in females than in males, mainly due to an increased in-
cidence of the depressive type among females.
Development and Course
The typical age at onset of schizoaffective di sorder is early adulthood, although onset can
occur anywhere from adolescence to late in lif e. A significant number of individuals diag-
nosed with another psychotic illness initially will receive the diagnosis schizoaffective dis-
order later when the pattern of mood epis odes has become more apparent. With the
current diagnostic Criterion C, it is expected  that the diagnosis for some individuals will
convert from schizoaffective d isorder to another disorder as mood symptoms become less
prominent. The prognosis for schizoaffective di sorder is somewhat better than the prog-
nosis for schizophrenia but worse than the prognosis for mood disorders. 
Schizoaffective disorder may occur in a variety of temporal patterns. The following is
a typical pattern: An individual may have pronounced auditory hallucinations and per-
secutory delusions for 2 months  before the onset of a prom inent major depressive episode.
The psychotic symptoms and the full major depr essive episode are then present for 3 months.
Then, the individual recovers completely fr om the major depressive episode, but the psy-
chotic symptoms persist for another month be fore they too disappear. During this period
of illness, the individual’s symptoms concurre ntly met criteria for a major depressive ep-
isode and Criterion A for schizophrenia, and during this same period of illness, auditory
hallucinations and delusions were present both before and after the depressive phase. The
total period of illness lasted for about 6 mo nths, with psychotic sy mptoms alone present
during the initial 2 months, both depressive  and psychotic symptoms present during the
next 3 months, and psychotic symptoms alone pr esent during the last month. In this in-
stance, the duration of the depressive episode was not brief relative to the total duration of
the psychotic disturbance, and thus the presen tation qualifies for a diagnosis of schizoaf-
fective disorder.
The expression of psychotic symptoms across the lifespan is variable. Depressive or
manic symptoms can occur before the onset of psychosis, during acute psychotic episodes,
during residual periods, and after cessation of psychosis. For example, an individual
might present with prominent mood symptoms  during the prodromal stage of schizo-
phrenia. This pattern is not necessarily indicative  of schizoaffective disorder, since it is the
co-occurrence of psychotic and mood symptoms  that is diagnostic. For an individual with
symptoms that clearly meet the criteria for sc hizoaffective disorder but who on further fol-
low-up only presents with residual psychoti c symptoms (such as subthreshold psychosis
and/or prominent negative symptoms), the diagnosis may be changed to schizophrenia,
as the total proportion of psychotic illness compared with mood symptoms becomes more
prominent. Schizoaffective diso rder, bipolar type, may be more common in young adults,
whereas schizoaffective disorder, depressive type, may be more common in older adults. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Among individuals with schizophrenia, there may be an in-
creased risk for schizoaffective disorder in first-degree relatives. The risk for schizoaffec-
tive disorder may be increased among indivi duals who have a first- degree relative with
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, or schizoaffective disorder. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
Cultural and socioeconomic factors must be considered, particularly  when the individual
and the clinician do not share the same cultur al and economic backgr ound. Ideas that ap-
pear to be delusional in one culture (e.g., witchcraft) may be commonly held in another.
There is also some evidence in the literature for the overdiagnosis of schizophrenia com-
Schizoaffective Disorder 109
pared with schizoaffective disorder in Afri can American and Hispanic populations, so
care must be taken to ensure a culturally appropri ate evaluation that includes both psy-
chotic and affective symptoms.
Suicide Risk 
The lifetime risk of suicide for schizophreni a and schizoaffective disorder is 5%, and the
presence of depressive symptoms is correlated with a higher risk for suicide. There is ev-
idence that suicide rates are higher in North American populations than in European,
Eastern European, South American, and Indian  populations of individuals with schizo-
phrenia or schizoaffective disorder.
Functional Consequences of  Schizoaffective Disorder
Schizoaffective disorder is associated with social and occupational dysfunction, but dys-
function is not a diagnostic criterion (as it is for schizophrenia), an d there is substantial
variability between individuals diagno sed with schizoaffective disorder.
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders and medical conditions. A wide variety of psychiatric and med-
ical conditions can manifest with psychotic and mood symptoms that must be considered
in the differential diagnosis of  schizoaffective disorder. Th ese include psychotic disorder
due to another medical condition; delirium; major neurocognitive disorder; substance/
medication-induced psychotic disorder or neurocognitive disorder; bipolar disorders
with psychotic features; major depressive diso rder with psychotic features; depressive or
bipolar disorders with catatonic features; schi zotypal, schizoid, or paranoid personality
disorder; brief psychotic disorder; schizophre niform disorder; schizophrenia; delusional
disorder; and other specified and unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders. Medical conditions and substance use can present with a combination of psy-
chotic and mood symptoms, and thus psychoti c disorder due to another medical condition
needs to be excluded. Distinguishing schizoaffective disorder from schizophrenia and
from depressive and bipolar diso rders with psychotic features  is often difficult. Criterion
C is designed to separate schizoaffective di sorder from schizophrenia, and Criterion B is
designed to distinguish schizoaffective diso rder from a depressive or bipolar disorder
with psychotic features. More specifically, schizoaffective disorder can be distinguished
from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psyc hotic features due to the presence of prom-
inent delusions and/or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in the absence of a major mood
episode. In contrast, in depressive or bipo lar disorders with psychotic features, the psy-
chotic features primarily occur during the mo od episode(s). Because the relative propor-
tion of mood to psychotic symptoms may ch ange over time, the appropriate diagnosis
may change from and to schizoaffective disord er (e.g., a diagnosis of schizoaffective dis-
order for a severe and prominent major depre ssive episode lasting 3 months during the
first 6 months of a persistent psychotic illnes s would be changed to schizophrenia if active
psychotic or prominent residual symptoms pe rsist over several years without a recurrence
of another mood episode).
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. Other medical conditions and
substance use can manifest with a combinat ion of psychotic and mood symptoms, and
thus psychotic disorder due to another medical condition needs to be excluded. 
Schizophrenia, bipolar, and depressive disorders. Distinguishing schizoaffective dis-
order from schizophrenia and from depressiv e and bipolar disorders with psychotic fea-
tures is often difficult. Criterion C is design ed to separate schizoaffective disorder from
schizophrenia, and Criterion B is  designed to distinguish schi zoaffective disorder from a
110 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
depressive or bipolar disorder with psychoti c features. More specifically, schizoaffective
disorder can be distinguished from a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features
based on the presence of prom inent delusions and/or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in
the absence of a major mood episode. In cont rast, in depressive or bipolar disorder with
psychotic features, the psychoti c features primarily occur duri ng the mood episode(s). Be-
cause the relative proportion of mood to ps ychotic symptoms may change over time, the
appropriate diagnosis may change from and to  schizoaffective disorder. (For example, a
diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder for a se vere and prominent major depressive episode
lasting 3 months during the first 6 months of  a chronic psychotic illness would be changed
to schizophrenia if active ps ychotic or prominent residual symptoms persist over several
years without a recurrence of another mood episode.) 
Comorbidity
Many individuals diagnosed with schizoaffect ive disorder are also diagnosed with other
mental disorders, especially substance use d isorders and anxiety disorders. Similarly, the
incidence of medical conditions is increase d above base rate for the general population
and leads to decre ased life expectancy.
Substance/Medication-Induced
 Psychotic Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. Presence of one or both of the following symptoms:
1. Delusions.
2. Hallucinations.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both
(1) and (2):
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication
or withdrawal or after exposure to a medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Crite-
rion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a psychotic disorder that is not substance/
medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent psychotic disorder could in-
clude the following: 
The symptoms preceded the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms
persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of
acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence of an indepen-
dent non-substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder (e.g., a history of recur-
rent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical
picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic Disorder 111
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medica-
tion]-induced psychotic disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-
CM code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present
for the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the sub-
stance-induced psychotic disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should
record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced psychotic disorder
(e.g., “mild cocaine use diso rder with cocaine-induced ps ychotic disorder”). If a m oderate or
severe substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced psychotic disor-
der, the 4th position character is “2,” and the clinician should record “moderate [substance]
use disorder” or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the co-
morbid substance use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after
a one-time heavy use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the cli-
nician should record only the substance-induced psychotic disorder.
Specify  if (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for diag-
noses associated with substance class):
With onset during intoxication:  If the criteria are met for intoxication with the sub-
stance and the symptoms develop during intoxication.
With onset during withdrawal:  If the criteria are met for withdrawal from the sub-
stance and the symptoms develop during, or shortly after, withdrawal.
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative
symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe
in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and
severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chap-
ter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note:  Diagnosis of substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder can be made
without using this severity specifier.ICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CMWith use 
disorder, 
mildWith use 
disorder, 
moderate 
or severeWithout 
use 
disorder
Alcohol 291.9 F10.159 F10.259 F10.959
Cannabis 292.9 F12.159 F12.259 F12.959
Phencyclidine 292.9 F16.159 F16.259 F16.959
Other hallucinogen 292.9 F16.159 F16.259 F16.959
Inhalant 292.9 F18.159 F18.259 F18.959
Sedative, hypnotic, or 
anxiolytic292.9 F13.159 F13.259 F13.959
Amphetamine (or other 
stimulant)292.9 F15.159 F15.259 F15.959
Cocaine 292.9 F14.159 F14.259 F14.959
Other (or unknown) substance 292.9 F19.159 F19.259 F19.959
112 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Recording Procedures
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication -induced psychotic disorder begins
with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, de xamethasone) that is presumed to be causing
the delusions or hallucinations. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in
the criteria set, which is based on the drug clas s. For substances that do not fit into any of
the classes (e.g., dexamethasone), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in
cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of sub-
stance is unknown, the category “u nknown substance” should be used.
The name of the disorder is followed by the sp ecification of onset (i.e., onset during in-
toxication, onset during with drawal). Unlike the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM,
which combine the substance-induced disorder and substance use disorder into a single
code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code  is given for the substance use disorder. For
example, in the case of delusio ns occurring during intoxication in a man with a severe co-
caine use disorder, the diagnosis is 292.9 cocaine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset
during intoxication. An additional diagnosis of 304.20 severe cocaine use disorder is also
given. When more than one subs tance is judged to play a significant role in the development
of psychotic symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., 292.9 cannabis-induced psy-
chotic disorder with onset during intoxicati on, with severe cannabis use disorder; 292.9
phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder, wi th onset during intoxication, with mild
phencyclidine use disorder).
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder begins
with the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, de xamethasone) that is presumed to be causing
the delusions or hallucinations. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in
the criteria set, which is based on the drug  class and presence or absence of a comorbid
substance use disorder. For substances that do not fit into an y of the classes (e.g., dexa-
methasone), the code for “other substance” with no comorbid substance use should be
used; and in cases in which a substance is judged  to be an etiological factor but the specific
class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” wi th no comorbid sub-
stance use should be used.
When recording the name of the disorder, th e comorbid substance use disorder (if any)
is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced
psychotic disorder, followed by  the specification of onset (i .e., onset during intoxication,
onset during withdrawal). For example, in the case of delusions occurring during intoxi-
cation in a man with a severe cocaine use d isorder, the diagnosis is F14.259 severe cocaine
use disorder with cocaine-induced psychotic disorder, with onset during intoxication. A
separate diagnosis of the comorbid severe co caine use disorder is not given. If the sub-
stance-induced psychotic disorder occurs without a comorbid substance use disorder
(e.g., after a one-time heavy use of the substance), no accompanying substance use disor-
der is noted (e.g., F16.959 phencyclidine-induce d psychotic disorder, with onset during in-
toxication). When more than one substance is  judged to play a significant role in the
development of psychotic symptoms, each should be listed separately (e.g., F12.259 severe
cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced ps ychotic disorder, with onset during intox-
ication; F16.159 mild phencyclidine use diso rder with phencyclidine-induced psychotic
disorder, with onset during intoxication).
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of substance/medicati on-induced psychotic disorder are prominent
delusions and/or hallucinations (Criterion A) that are judged to be due to the physiolog-
ical effects of a substance/medication (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, or a toxin expo-
sure) (Criterion B). Hallucinations that the individual realizes are substance/medication-
induced are not included here and instead w ould be diagnosed as substance intoxication
Substance/Medication-Induced Psychotic Disorder 113
or substance withdrawal with the accompanyi ng specifier “with perceptual disturbances”
(applies to alcohol withdrawal; cannabis into xication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
withdrawal; and stimulant intoxication).
A substance/medication-induced psychotic di sorder is distinguished from a primary
psychotic disorder by considering the onset, course, and other factors. For drugs of abuse,
there must be evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of
substance use, intoxication, or withdrawal . Substance/medication-induced psychotic
disorders arise during or soon after exposure to a medication or after substance intoxica-
tion or withdrawal but can persist for week s, whereas primary psychotic disorders may
precede the onset of substance/ medication use or may occur during times of sustained ab-
stinence. Once initiated, the psychotic symp toms may continue as long as the substance/
medication use continues. Anothe r consideration is the presence  of features that are atyp-
ical of a primary psychotic disord er (e.g., atypical age at onse t or course). For example, the
appearance of delusions de novo in a person older than 35 years without a known history
of a primary psychotic disorder should sugge st the possibility of a substance/medication-
induced psychotic disorder. Even  a prior history of a primary psychotic disorder does not
rule out the possibility of a substance/medicati on-induced psychotic disorder. In contrast,
factors that suggest that the psychotic symp toms are better accounted for by a primary
psychotic disorder include persistence of ps ychotic symptoms for a substantial period of
time (i.e., a month or more) after the end of substance intoxication or acute substance with-
drawal or after cessation of medication use;  or a history of prior recurrent primary psy-
chotic disorders. Other causes of psychoti c symptoms must be considered even in an
individual with substance into xication or withdrawal, because substance use problems are
not uncommon among individuals with non- substance/medication-induced psychotic
disorders. 
In addition to the four symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the
assessment of cognition, depression, and mani a symptom domains is vital for making crit-
ically important distinctions between the va rious schizophrenia spectrum and other psy-
chotic disorders.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
Psychotic disorders can occur in association wi th intoxication with the following classes of
substances: alcohol; cannabis; hallucinoge ns, including phencyclidine and related sub-
stances; inhalants; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimulants (including cocaine);
and other (or unknown) substances. Psychotic disorders can occur in association with with-
drawal from the following classes of substanc es: alcohol; sedatives, hypnotics, and anxio-
lytics; and other (or unknown) substances. 
Some of the medications reported to evoke psychotic symptoms include anesthetics
and analgesics, anticholinergic agents, anticonvulsants, antihistamines, antihypertensive
and cardiovascular medications, antimicrobial medications, antiparkinsonian medica-
tions, chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., cyclosporine, procarbazine), corticosteroids, gastro-
intestinal medications, muscle relaxants, nonsteroidal anti-inf lammatory medications,
other over-the-counter medicati ons (e.g., phenylephrine, ps eudoephedrine), antidepres-
sant medication, and disulfiram . Toxins reported to induce  psychotic symptoms include
anticholinesterase, organophosphate insectic ides, sarin and other nerve gases, carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide,  and volatile substances such as fuel or paint.
Prevalence
Prevalence of substance/medi cation-induced psychotic disorder in the general popula-
tion is unknown. Between 7% and 25% of in dividuals presenting with a first episode of
psychosis in different settings are reported  to have substance/medication-induced psy-
chotic disorder. 
114 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Development and Course
The initiation of the disorder may vary co nsiderably with the substance. For example,
smoking a high dose of cocaine may produce psychosis within minutes, whereas days or
weeks of high-dose alcohol or sedative use ma y be required to produce psychosis. Alco-
hol-induced psychotic disorder, with hallucina tions, usually occurs only after prolonged,
heavy ingestion of alcohol in individuals who have moderate to severe alcohol use disorder,
and the hallucinations are generally auditory in nature.
Psychotic disorders induced by amphetamine and cocaine share similar clinical fea-
tures. Persecutory delusions may rapidly develop shortly af ter use of amphetamine or a
similarly acting sympathomimetic. The hallucination of bugs or vermin crawling in or un-
der the skin (formication) can lead to scratchi ng and extensive skin excoriations. Cannabis-
induced psychotic disorder may develop shortl y after high-dose cannabis use and usually
involves persecutory delusions, marked anxiety, emotional lability, and depersonalization.
The disorder usually remits within a day bu t in some cases may persist for a few days.
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disord er may at times persist when the offend-
ing agent is removed, such that it may be difficult initially to distinguish it from an indepen-
dent psychotic disorder. Agents such as amph etamines, phencyclidine, and cocaine have been
reported to evoke temporary ps ychotic states that can someti mes persist for weeks or longer
despite removal of the agent and treatment with  neuroleptic medication. In later life, poly-
pharmacy for medical conditions and exposure to medications for parkinsonism, cardiovas-
cular disease, and other medi cal disorders may be associated  with a greater likelihood of
psychosis induced by prescription medicati ons as opposed to substances of abuse.
Diagnostic Markers 
With substances for which relevant blood le vels are available (e.g., blood alcohol level,
other quantifiable blood levels su ch as digoxin), the presence of a level consistent with tox-
icity may increase diagnostic certainty.
Functional Consequences of 
Substance/Medication-Indu ced Psychotic Disorder
Substance/medication-induced psychotic diso rder is typically severely disabling and
consequently is observed most frequently in  emergency rooms, as individuals are often
brought to the acute-care setting when it occu rs. However, the disability is typically self-
limited and resolves upon removal of the offending agent.
Differential Diagnosis
Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal. Individuals intoxicated with stimu-
lants, cannabis, the opioid meperidine, or phe ncyclidine, or those withdrawing from alco-
hol or sedatives, may experience altered percep tions that they recognize as drug effects. If
reality testing for these experiences remains inta ct (i.e., the individual recognizes that the
perception is substance induced and neither believe s in nor acts on it), the diagnosis is not
substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. Instead, substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal, with perceptual disturbances, is diagnosed (e.g., cocaine intoxica-
tion, with perceptual disturba nces). “Flashback” hallucinations that can occur long after
the use of hallucinogens has stopped are diag nosed as hallucinogen persisting perception
disorder. If substance/medication-induced psychotic symptoms oc cur exclusively during
the course of a delirium, as in severe forms of alcohol withdrawal, the psychotic symptoms
are considered to be an associated feature of the delirium and are not diagnosed sepa-
rately. Delusions in the context of a major or  mild neurocognitive disorder would be di-
agnosed as major or mild neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance.
Psychotic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 115
Primary psychotic disorder. A substance/medication-induc ed psychotic disorder is
distinguished from a primary psychotic disord er, such as schizophrenia, schizoaffective
disorder, delusional disorder, brief psychotic disorder, other specified schizophrenia
spectrum and other psychotic disorder, or un specified schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorder, by the fact that a substance is judged to be etiologically related to the
symptoms.
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. A substance/medication-induced
psychotic disorder due to a prescribed trea tment for a mental or medical condition must
have its onset while the individual is receiv ing the medication (or during withdrawal, if
there is a withdrawal syndrome associated with the medication). Because individuals with
medical conditions often take medications fo r those conditions, the clinician must con-
sider the possibility that the psychotic symptoms are caused by the physiological conse-
quences of the medical condition rather than  the medication, in which case psychotic
disorder due to another medical condition is  diagnosed. The hist ory often provides the
primary basis for such a judgme nt. At times, a change in the treatment for the medical con-
dition (e.g., medication substitution or disc ontinuation) may be needed to determine em-
pirically for that individual whether the medica tion is the causative agent. If the clinician
has ascertained that the distur bance is attributable to both  a medical condition and sub-
stance/medication use, both diagnoses (i.e., psychotic disorder due to another medical
condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) may be given.
Psychotic Disorder
 Due to Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. Prominent hallucinations or delusions.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings that the
disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condi-
tion.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder.
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Specify whether:
Code based on predominant symptom:
293.81 (F06.2)  With delusions:  If delusions are the predominant symptom.
293.82 (F06.0)  With hallucinations:  If hallucinations are the predominant symptom.
Coding note: Include the name of the other medical condition in the name of the mental
disorder (e.g., 293.81 [F06.2] psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm, with de-
lusions). The other medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately
before the psychotic disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 162.9 [C34.90] malignant
lung neoplasm; 293.81 [F06.2] psychotic disorder due to malignant lung neoplasm, with
delusions).
Specify current severity:
Severity is rated by a quantitative assessment of the primary symptoms of psychosis,
including delusions, hallucinations, abnormal psychomotor behavior, and negative
symptoms. Each of these symptoms may be rated for its current severity (most severe
in the last 7 days) on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 (not present) to 4 (present and
116 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
severe). (See Clinician-Rated Dimensions of Psychosis Symptom Severity in the chap-
ter “Assessment Measures.”)
Note:  Diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition can be made
without using this severity specifier.
Specifiers
In addition to the symptom domain areas identified in the diagnostic criteria, the assess-
ment of cognition, depressio n, and mania symptom domains is vital for making critically
important distinctions between the various schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic
disorders.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of psychotic disorder  due to another medical condition are promi-
nent delusions or hallucinations that are judged  to be attributable to the physiological ef-
fects of another medical condition and are not better explained by another mental disorder
(e.g., the symptoms are not a psychologically mediated response to a severe medical con-
dition, in which case a diagnosis of brief psychotic disorder, with ma rked stressor, would
be appropriate). 
Hallucinations can occur in any sensory modalit y (i.e., visual, olfactory, gustatory, tac-
tile, or auditory), but certai n etiological factors are likely to evoke specific hallucinatory
phenomena. Olfactory hallucinations are suggest ive of temporal lobe  epilepsy. Hallucina-
tions may vary from simple and unformed to highly comp lex and organized, depending
on etiological and environmental factors. Ps ychotic disorder due to another medical con-
dition is generally not diagnosed if the individual maintains reality testing for the hallu-
cinations and appreciates that they result from the medical conditio n. Delusions may have
a variety of themes, including somatic, gran diose, religious, and, most commonly, perse-
cutory. On the whole, however, associations  between delusions and particular medical
conditions appear to be less specific  than is the case for hallucinations.
In determining whether the ps ychotic disturbance is attributable to another medical
condition, the presence of a medical condition must be identified and considered to be the
etiology of the psychosis through a physiol ogical mechanism. Although there are no
infallible guidelines for determining whether th e relationship between the psychotic distur-
bance and the medical condition is etiological, several considerations provide some guidance.
One consideration is the presen ce of a temporal association between the onset, exacerba-
tion, or remission of the medical condition an d that of the psychotic disturbance. A second
consideration is the presence of features that  are atypical for a psychotic disorder (e.g.,
atypical age at onset or presence of visual or  olfactory hallucinations). The disturbance must
also be distinguished from a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder or an-
other mental disorder (e.g.,  an adjustment disorder). 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The temporal association of th e onset or exacerbation of th e medical condition offers the
greatest diagnostic certainty that the delusions  or hallucinations are attributable to a med-
ical condition. Additional factors may incl ude concomitant treatments for the underlying
medical condition that confer a risk for psychosis independently, such as steroid treatment
for autoimmune disorders.
Prevalence
Prevalence rates for psychotic di sorder due to another medical condition are difficult to es-
timate given the wide variety of underlying medical etiologies. Life time prevalence has
Psychotic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition 117
been estimated to range from 0.21% to 0.54%. When the prevalence findings are stratified
by age group, individuals older than 65 years have a significantly greater prevalence of
0.74% compared with those in younger age grou ps. Rates of psychosis also vary according
to the underlying medical condition; cond itions most commonly  associated with psy-
chosis include untreated endocrine and metabo lic disorders, autoim mune disorders (e.g.,
systemic lupus erythematosus, N-methyl- D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor autoimmune en-
cephalitis), or temporal lobe epilepsy. Psycho sis due to epilepsy has been further differ-
entiated into ictal, postictal, and interictal  psychosis. The most common of these is postictal
psychosis, observed in 2%–7.8% of epilepsy patients. Among older individuals, there may
be a higher prevalence of the disorder in fe males, although additional gender-related fea-
tures are not clear and vary considerably with  the gender distributions of the underlying
medical conditions.
Development and Course
Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition may be a single transient state or it
may be recurrent, cycling with  exacerbations and remissions of the underlying medical
condition. Although treatment of the underlyi ng medical condition often results in a res-
olution of the psychosis, this is not always  the case, and psychotic symptoms may persist
long after the medical event (e.g ., psychotic disorder due to fo cal brain injury). In the con-
text of chronic conditions such as multiple sc lerosis or chronic interictal psychosis of epi-
lepsy, the psychosis may assume a long-term course.
The expression of psychotic disorder due to  another medical cond ition does not differ
substantially in phenomenology depending on  age at occurrence. However, older age
groups have a higher prevalence of the disorder, which is most likely due to the increasing
medical burden associated with advanced ag e and the cumulative effects of deleterious
exposures and age-related processes (e.g., athe rosclerosis). The nature of the underlying
medical conditions is likely to change across  the lifespan, with younger age groups more
affected by epilepsy, head trauma, autoimmune , and neoplastic diseas es of early to mid-
life, and older age groups more affected by stroke disease, anoxic events, and multiple sys-
tem comorbidities. Underlying factors with in creasing age, such as preexisting cognitive
impairment as well as vision and hearing impairments, may incur a greater risk for psy-
chosis, possibly by serving to lower th e threshold for experiencing psychosis. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Course modifiers. Identification and treatment of the underlying medical condition has
the greatest impact on course, although pr eexisting central nervou s system injury may
confer a worse course outcome (e.g., head trauma, cerebr ovascular disease).
Diagnostic Markers
The diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to an other medical condition depends on the clin-
ical condition of each individual, and the diag nostic tests will vary according to that con-
dition. A variety of medical conditions ma y cause psychotic symp toms. These include
neurological condit ions (e.g., neoplasms, cerebrovascular disease, Huntington's disease,
multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, auditory or visual nerve injury or impairment, deafness,
migraine, central nervous  system infections), endocrine co nditions (e.g., hyper- and hypo-
thyroidism, hyper- and hypopa rathyroidism, hyper- and hypo adrenocorticism), metabolic
conditions (e.g., hypoxia, hypercarbia, hypoglycemia), fluid or electrolyte imbalances,
hepatic or renal diseases, and autoimmune di sorders with central nervous system involve-
ment (e.g., systemic lupus er ythematosus). The associated physical examination findings,
laboratory findings, and patterns of prevalen ce or onset reflect th e etiological medical
condition.
118 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Suicide Risk 
Suicide risk in the context of psychotic diso rder due to another me dical condition is not
clearly delineated, although certain conditions  such as epilepsy and multiple sclerosis are
associated with increased rates of suicide, which may be further increased in the presence
of psychosis. 
Functional Consequences of Psychotic Disorder 
Due to Another Medical Condition
Functional disability is typically severe in the context of psychotic di sorder due to another
medical condition but will vary  considerably by the type of condition and likely improve
with successful resolution of the condition.
Differential Diagnosis
Delirium. Hallucinations and delusions commonly occur in the context of a delirium;
however, a separate diagnosis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition is
not given if the disturbance occurs exclusively during the co urse of a delirium. Delusions
in the context of a major or mild neurocogni tive disorder would be diagnosed as major or
mild neurocognitive disorder, with behavioral disturbance. 
Substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. If there is evidence of recent or
prolonged substance use (including medicati ons with psychoactive effects), withdrawal
from a substance, or exposure to a toxin (e.g ., LSD [lysergic acid diethylamide] intoxica-
tion, alcohol withdrawal), a substance/medica tion-induced psychotic disorder should be
considered. Symptoms that occur during or shor tly after (i.e., within 4 weeks) of substance
intoxication or withdrawal or after medication use may be es pecially indicative of a sub-
stance-induced psychotic disorder, depending on the character, duration, or amount of
the substance used. If the clin ician has ascertained that the disturbance is due to both a
medical condition and substance use, both diag noses (i.e., psychotic disorder due to an-
other medical condition and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder) can be
given.
Psychotic disorder. Psychotic disorder due to another medical condition must be distin-
guished from a psychotic disord er (e.g., schizophrenia, delusi onal disorder, schizoaffective
disorder) or a depressive or bipolar disorder , with psychotic featur es. In psychotic disor-
ders and in depressive or bipolar disorders, wi th psychotic features, no specific and direct
causative physiological mechanisms associated with a medical condition can be demon-
strated. Late age at onset and the absence of a personal or family history of schizophrenia
or delusional disorder suggest the need for a thorough ass essment to rule out the diagno-
sis of psychotic disorder due to another medical condition. Auditory hallucinations that
involve voices speaking complex sentences ar e more characteristic of schizophrenia than
of psychotic disorder due to a medical condition. Other types of hallucinations (e.g., vi-
sual, olfactory) commonly signal a psychotic disorder due to another medical condition or
a substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder.
Comorbidity
Psychotic disorder due to another medical co ndition in individuals older than 80 years is
associated with concurrent major neurocognitive disorder (dementia).
Catatonia Associated With Another Mental Disorder (Catatonia Specifier) 119
Catatonia
Catatonia can occur in the context of several disorders, including neurodevelopmental,
psychotic, bipolar, depressive disorders, and other medical cond itions (e.g., cerebral folate
deficiency, rare autoimmune and paraneoplastic disorders.  The manual does not treat
catatonia as an independent class but recognizes  a) catatonia associated with another men-
tal disorder (i.e., a neurodevelopmental, psychotic disord er, a bipolar disorder, a depres-
sive disorder, or other mental disorder), b)  catatonic disorder due to another medical
condition, and c) unspecified catatonia.
Catatonia is defined by the pres ence of three or more of 12 psychomotor features in the
diagnostic criteria for catatoni a associated with another mental disorder and catatonic dis-
order due to another medical condition. The es sential feature of cata tonia is a marked psy-
chomotor disturbance that may involve decr eased motor activity, decreased engagement
during interview or physical examination, or excessive and peculiar motor activity. The
clinical presentation of ca tatonia can be puzzling, as th e psychomotor disturbance may
range from marked unresponsiveness to marked  agitation. Motoric immobility may be se-
vere (stupor) or moderate (catalepsy and waxy flexibility). Similarly, decreased engage-
ment may be severe (mutism) or moderate  (negativism). Excessive and peculiar motor
behaviors can be complex (e.g.,  stereotypy) or simple (agitation) and may include echola-
lia and echopraxia. In extreme cases, the same individual may wax and wane between de-
creased and excessive motor activity. The se emingly opposing clinical features and
variable manifestations of the diagnosis cont ribute to a lack of awareness and decreased
recognition of catatonia. During  severe stages of catatonia, the individual may need care-
ful supervision to avoid self-h arm or harming others. There are potential risks from mal-
nutrition, exhaustion, hyperpyr exia and self-inflicted injury. 
Catatonia Associated With Another
Mental Disorder (Catatonia Specifier)
293.89 (F06.1)
A. The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms: 
1. Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
2. Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
3. Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
4. Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [exclude if known aphasia]).
5. Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
6. Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against gravity).
7. Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
8. Stereotypy (i.e., repetitive, abnormally frequent, non-goal-directed movements).
9. Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
10. Grimacing.
11. Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
12. Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
Coding note:  Indicate the name of the associated mental disorder when recording the
name of the condition (i.e., 293.89 [F06.1] catatonia associated with major depressive dis-
order). Code first the associated mental disorder (e.g., neurodevelopmental disorder, brief
120 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
psychotic disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder,
bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, or other mental disorder) (e.g., 295.70 [F25.1]
schizoaffective disorder, depressive type; 293.89 [F06.1] catatonia associated with
schizoaffective disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Catatonia associated with another mental diso rder (catatonia specifier) may be used when
criteria are met for catatonia during the course of a neurodevelopmental, psychotic, bipo-
lar, depressive, or other mental disorder. The catatonia specifier is appropriate when the
clinical picture is characterized by marked ps ychomotor distur bance and involves at least
three of the 12 diagnostic features listed in Cr iterion A. Catatonia is typically diagnosed in
an inpatient setting and occurs in up to 35% of individuals with schizophrenia, but the ma-
jority of catatonia cases invol ve individuals with depressive  or bipolar disorders. Before
the catatonia specifier is used in neurodevel opmental, psychotic, bipolar, depressive, or
other mental disorders, a wide variety of ot her medical conditions need to be ruled out;
these conditions include, but are not limited to, medical cond itions due to infectious, met-
abolic, or neurological conditions (see “Catatonic Disorder Due to Another Medical Con-
dition”). Catatonia can also be a side effect of a medication (see the chapter “Medication-
Induced Movement Disorders and Other Advers e Effects of Medication”). Because of the
seriousness of the complications, particular attention should be paid to the possibility that
the catatonia is attributable to 333.92 (G21.0) neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Catatonic Disorder Due to
Another Medical Condition
Diagnostic Criteria 293.89 (F06.1)
A. The clinical picture is dominated by three (or more) of the following symptoms: 
1. Stupor (i.e., no psychomotor activity; not actively relating to environment).
2. Catalepsy (i.e., passive induction of a posture held against gravity).
3. Waxy flexibility (i.e., slight, even resistance to positioning by examiner).
4. Mutism (i.e., no, or very little, verbal response [ Note:  not applicable if there is an
established aphasia]).
5. Negativism (i.e., opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli).
6. Posturing (i.e., spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against gravity).
7. Mannerism (i.e., odd, circumstantial caricature of normal actions).
8. Stereotypy (i.e., repetitive, abnormally frequent, non-goal-directed movements).
9. Agitation, not influenced by external stimuli.
10. Grimacing.
11. Echolalia (i.e., mimicking another’s speech).
12. Echopraxia (i.e., mimicking another’s movements).
B. There is evidence from the history, physical  examination, or laboratory findings that the
disturbance is the direct pathophysiological consequence of another medical condition.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder (e.g., a manic episode). 
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Unspecified Catatonia 121
Coding note:  Include the name of the medical condition in the name of the mental disor-
der (e.g., 293.89 [F06.1]) catatonic disorder due to hepatic encephalopathy). The other
medical condition should be coded and listed separately immediately before the cata-
tonic disorder due to the medical condition (e.g., 572.2 [K71.90] hepatic encephalopathy;
293.89 [F06.1] catatonic disorder due to hepatic encephalopathy).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of catato nic disorder due to another me dical condition is the presence
of catatonia that is judged to be attributed to the physiological effects of another medical
condition. Catatonia can be diagnosed by the pres ence of at least three of the 12 clinical fea-
tures in Criterion A. There must be evidence  from the history, physical examination, or
laboratory findings that the catatonia is attr ibutable to another medical condition (Crite-
rion B). The diagnosis is not given if the ca tatonia is better explained by another mental
disorder (e.g., manic episode) (Criterion C) or if it occurs exclusivel y during the course of
a delirium (Criterion D).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A variety of medical conditions may cause catatonia, especially neurological conditions
(e.g., neoplasms, head trauma, cerebrovascular  disease, encephalitis) and metabolic con-
ditions (e.g., hypercalcemia, hepatic encepha lopathy, homocystinuria , diabetic ketoacido-
sis). The associated physical examination find ings, laboratory findings, and patterns of
prevalence and onset reflect those of  the etiological medical condition.
Differential Diagnosis
A separate diagnosis of catatonic disorder due to another medical condition is not given if
the catatonia occurs exclusively during the course of a delirium or neuroleptic malignant
syndrome. If the individual is currently taking neurolep tic medication, consideration
should be given to medication -induced movement disorders (e.g., abnormal positioning
may be due to neuroleptic-induced acute dy stonia) or neuroleptic malignant syndrome
(e.g., catatonic-like features may be present,  along with associated vital sign and/or labo-
ratory abnormalities). Catatonic symptoms ma y be present in any of the following five
psychotic disorders: brief psychotic disorder , schizophreniform disorder, schizophrenia,
schizoaffective disorder, and substance/medication-induced psychotic disorder. It may
also be present in some of the neurodevelopme ntal disorders, in all of the bipolar and de-
pressive disorders,  and in other mental disorders. 
Unspecified Catatonia
 
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of catatonia
cause clinically significant distress or impairm ent in social, occupational, or other impor-
tant areas of functioning but either the nature of the underlying mental disorder or other
medical condition is unclear, full criteria for catatonia are not met, or there is insufficient
information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings). 
Coding note:  Code first 781.99 (R29.818)  other symptoms involving nervous and muscu-
loskeletal systems, followed by 293.89 (F06.1)  unspecified catatonia.
122 Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders
Other Specified Schizophrenia Spectrum and
Other Psychotic Disorder
298.8 (F28)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a schizophre-
nia spectrum and other psychotic disorder that cause clinically significant distress or im-
pairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but
do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the schizophrenia spectrum and other
psychotic disorders diagnostic class. The other specified schizophrenia spectrum and oth-
er psychotic disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to com-
municate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for any
specific schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder. This is done by recording “oth-
er specified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder” followed by the specific
reason (e.g., “persistent auditory hallucinations”). 
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1.Persistent auditory hallucinations  occurring in the absence of any other features.
2.Delusions with significant overlapping mood episodes:  This includes persistent
delusions with periods of overlapping mood episodes that are present for a substantial
portion of the delusional disturbance (such that  the criterion stipulating only brief mood
disturbance in delusional disorder is not met).
3.Attenuated psychosis syndrome: This syndrome is characterized by psychotic-like
symptoms that are below a threshold for full psychosis (e.g., the symptoms are less
severe and more transient, and insight is relatively maintained).
4.Delusional symptoms in partner of individual with delusional disorder:  In the
context of a relationship, the delusional ma terial from the dominant partner provides
content for delusional belief by the individual who may not otherwise entirely meet cri-
teria for delusional disorder.
Unspecified Schizophrenia Spectrum and
Other Psychotic Disorder
298.9 (F29)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a schizophre-
nia spectrum and other psychotic disorder that cause clinically significant distress or im-
pairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but
do not meet the full criteria for any of the disorders in the schizophrenia spectrum and oth-
er psychotic disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and oth-
er psychotic disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to
specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific schizophrenia spectrum and
other psychotic disorder, and includes presentatio ns in which there is insufficient informa-
tion to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings). 