361Sleep-Wake
 Disorders
The DSM-5 classification  of sleep-wake disorders is intended for use by general
mental health and medical clinicians (those caring for adult, geriatric, and pediatric pa-
tients). Sleep-wake disorders encompass 10 d isorders or disorder groups: insomnia disor-
der, hypersomnolence disorder, narcolepsy, br eathing-related sleep disorders, circadian
rhythm sleep-wake disorders,  non–rapid eye movement (NRE M) sleep arousal disorders,
nightmare disorder, rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder, restless legs syn-
drome, and substance/medication-induced sleep disorder. Individuals with these disor-
ders typically present with sleep-wake complain ts of dissatisfaction regarding the quality,
timing, and amount of sleep. Resulting dayt ime distress and impairme nt are core features
shared by all of these sleep-wake disorders.
The organization of this chapter is designed to  facilitate differential diagnosis of sleep-
wake complaints and to clarify when referral to a sleep specialist is appropriate for further
assessment and treatment planning. The DSM-5 sleep disorders nosology uses a simple,
clinically useful approach, while also reflecti ng scientific advances  in epidemiology, ge-
netics, pathophysiology, assessment, and in terventions research since DSM-IV. In some
cases (e.g., insomnia disorder ), a “lumping” approach has been adopted, whereas in oth-
ers (e.g., narcolepsy), a “spli tting” approach has been taken, reflecting the availability of
validators derived from epidem iological, neurobiological, and interventions research. 
Sleep disorders are often accompanied by de pression, anxiety, an d cognitive changes
that must be addressed in treatment planni ng and management. Fu rthermore, persistent
sleep disturbances (both insomn ia and excessive sleepiness) ar e established risk factors for
the subsequent development of mental illne sses and substance use disorders. They may
also represent a prodromal expression of an episode of mental illness, allowing the possi-
bility of early intervention to preemp t or to attenuate a full-blown episode.
The differential diagnosis of sleep-wake co mplaints necessitates a multidimensional
approach, with consideration of  possibly coexisting medical and neurological conditions.
Coexisting clinical conditions are the rule, no t the exception. Sleep disturbances furnish a
clinically useful indicator of medical and ne urological conditions that often coexist with
depression and other common mental disord ers. Prominent among these comorbidities
are breathing-related sleep disorders, disord ers of the heart and lungs (e.g., congestive
heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), neurodegenerative disorders (e.g.,
Alzheimer’s disease), and disorders of the musculoskeletal system (e.g., osteoarthritis).
These disorders not only may disturb sleep but also may th emselves be worsened during
sleep (e.g., prolonged apneas or electrocardi ographic arrhythmias during REM sleep; con-
fusional arousals in patients with dementing illness; seizures in persons with complex
partial seizures). REM sleep behavior disorder is often an early indicator of neurodegen-
erative disorders (alpha synucleinopathies) li ke Parkinson’s disease. For all of these rea-
sons—related to differential diagnosis, clinic al comorbidity, and fa cilitation of treatment
planning—sleep disorders are included in DSM-5.
The approach taken to the clas sification of sleep-wake disorders in DSM-5 can be under-
stood within the context of “lumping versus splitting.” DSM-IV represented an effort to
simplify sleep-wake disorders cl assification and thus aggregated diagnoses under broader,
less differentiated labels. At the other pole, the International Classification of Sleep Disorders,
362 Sleep-Wake Disorders
2nd Edition (ICSD-2) elaborated numerous diagnostic subtypes. DSM-IV was prepared for
use by mental health and general medical clinicians who are not experts in sleep medicine.
ICSD-2 reflected the science and opinions of  the sleep specialist community and was pre-
pared for use by specialists. 
The weight of available evidence supports the superior performance characteristics
(interrater reliability, as well as convergent, discriminant, and face validity) of simpler, less-
differentiated approaches to diagnosis of sleep-wake disord ers. The text accompanying
each set of diagnostic criteria provides linka ges to the corresponding disorders included in
ICSD-2. The DSM-5 sleep-wake disorders classif ication also specifies corresponding non-
psychiatric listings (e.g., ne urology codes) from the International Classification of Diseases
(ICD).
The field of sleep disorders medicine has progressed in this direction since the publi-
cation of DSM-IV. The use of biological validators is now embodied in the DSM-5 classi-
fication of sleep-wake disorder s, particularly for disorders of  excessive sleepiness, such as
narcolepsy; for breathing-rela ted sleep disorders, for whic h formal sleep studies (i.e.,
polysomnography) are indicated; and for rest less legs syndrome, which can often coexist
with periodic limb movements during sleep, detectable via polysomnography.
Insomnia Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 307.42 (F51.01)
A. A predominant complaint of dissatisfaction with sleep quantity or quality, associated
with one (or more) of the following symptoms:
1. Difficulty initiating sleep. (In children, this may manifest as difficulty initiating sleep
without caregiver intervention.)
2. Difficulty maintaining sleep, characterized by frequent awakenings or problems re-
turning to sleep after awakenings. (In children, this may manifest as difficulty return-
ing to sleep without caregiver intervention.)
3. Early-morning awakening with inability to return to sleep.
B. The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, oc-
cupational, educational, academic, behavioral, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The sleep difficulty occurs at least 3 nights per week.
D. The sleep difficulty is present for at least 3 months.
E. The sleep difficulty occurs despite adequate opportunity for sleep.
F. The insomnia is not better explained by and does not occur exclusively during the
course of another sleep-wake disorder (e.g., narcolepsy, a breathing-related sleep dis-
order, a circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder, a parasomnia).
G. The insomnia is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug
of abuse, a medication).
H. Coexisting mental disorders and medical conditions do not adequately explain the pre-
dominant complaint of insomnia.
Specify if:
With non–sleep disorder  mental comorbidity, including substance use disorders
With other medical comorbidity
With other sleep disorder
Coding note: The code 307.42 (F51.01) applies to all three specifiers. Code also the
relevant associated mental disorder, medica l condition, or other sleep disorder imme-
diately after the code for insomnia disorder in order to indicate the association.
Insomnia Disorder 363
Specify if:
Episodic:  Symptoms last at least 1 month but less than 3 months.
Persistent:  Symptoms last 3 months or longer.
Recurrent: Two (or more) episodes within the space of 1 year.
Note:  Acute and short-term insomnia (i.e., symptoms lasting less than 3 months but oth-
erwise meeting all criteria with regard to frequency, intensity, distress, and/or impairment)
should be coded as an other specified insomnia disorder.
Note.  The diagnosis of insomnia disorder is given whether it occurs as an independent
condition or is comorbid with another mental disorder (e.g., major depressive disorder),
medical condition (e.g., pain), or another sleep disorder (e.g., a breathing-related sleep dis-
order). For instance, insomnia may develop it s own course with some anxiety and depres-
sive features but in the absenc e of criteria being met for an y one mental disorder. Insomnia
may also manifest as a clinical feature of a more predominant ment al disorder . Persistent
insomnia may even be a risk factor for depression and is a common residual symptom af-
ter treatment for this condition. With comorb id insomnia and a mental disorder, treatment
may also need to target both conditions. Give n these different courses, it is often impossi-
ble to establish the precise nature of the rela tionship between these clinical entities, and
this relationship may change over time. Therefore, in th e presence of insomnia and a co-
morbid disorder, it is not ne cessary to make a causal attribution between the two condi-
tions. Rather, the diagnosis of insomnia disord er is made with concurrent specification of
the clinically comorbid conditions. A concurre nt insomnia diagnosis should only be con-
sidered when the insomnia is sufficiently severe  to warrant independent clinical attention;
otherwise, no separate diagnosis is necessary.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of insomnia disorder is dissatisfaction with sleep quantity or quality
with complaints of difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep. The sleep complaints are ac-
companied by clinically significant distress or  impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning. The sleep dist urbance may occur during the course of an-
other mental disorder or medical condition, or it  may occur independently.
Different manifestations of insomnia can oc cur at different times of the sleep period. Sleep-
onset insomnia  (or initial insomnia ) involves difficulty initia ting sleep at bedtime. Sleep mainte-
nance insomnia  (or middle insomnia ) involves frequent or prol onged awakenings throughout
the night. Late insomnia involves early-morning awakening with an inability to return to sleep.
Difficulty maintaining sleep is the most co mmon single symptom of insomnia, followed by
difficulty falling asleep, while a combination of  these symptoms is th e most common presen-
tation overall. The specific type of sleep comp laint often varies over time. Individuals who
complain of difficulty falling asleep at one time may later complain of difficulty maintaining
sleep, and vice versa. Symptoms of difficulty falling asleep and difficulty maintaining sleep
can be quantified by the individual’s retrospect ive self-report, sleep di aries, or other methods,
such as actigraphy or polysomnography, but th e diagnosis of insomnia disorder is based on
the individual’s subjecti ve perception of sleep or a caretaker’s report. 
Nonrestorative sleep,  a complaint of poor sleep quality that does not leave the individual
rested upon awakening despite adequate du ration, is a common sleep complaint usually
occurring in association with difficulty initiating or maintaining sleep, or less frequently in
isolation. This complaint can also be reported in association with other sleep disorders
(e.g., breathing-related sleep disorder). When  a complaint of nonres torative sleep occurs
in isolation (i.e., in the absence of difficulty initiating and/or maintaining sleep) but all di-
agnostic criteria with regard to frequency, duration, and daytime distress and impairments
are otherwise met, a diagnosis of other specif ied insomnia disorder or unspecified insom-
nia disorder is made.
364 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Aside from the frequency and du ration criteria required to make the diagnosis, addi-
tional criteria are useful to quantify insomnia severity. These quantitative criteria, while
arbitrary, are provided for illustrative purpose only. For instance, difficulty initiating sleep
is defined by a subjective sleep latency greater than 20–30 minutes, and difficulty maintain-
ing sleep is defined by a subjective time awake after sleep onset greater than 20–30 min-
utes. Although there is no standard definition  of early-morning awakening, this symptom
involves awakening at least 30 minutes before the scheduled time and before total sleep
time reaches 6½ hours. It is essential to take into account no t only the final awakening time
but also the bedtime on the previ ous evening. Awakening at 4:00 A.M. does not have the
same clinical significance in those who go to bed at 9:00 P.M. as in those who go to bed at
11:00 P.M. Such a symptom may also reflect an age- dependent decrease in the ability to sus-
tain sleep or an age-dependent shift in the timing of the main sleep period. 
Insomnia disorder involves daytime impairments as well as nighttime sleep difficulties.
These include fatigue or, less commonly, dayt ime sleepiness; the latter is more common
among older individuals and wh en insomnia is comorbid with another medical condition
(e.g., chronic pain) or sleep disorder (e.g., sl eep apnea). Impairment in  cognitive performance
may include difficulties with attention, concentration and memory, and even with performing
simple manual skills. Associated mood disturba nces are typically described as irritability or
mood lability and less commonly as depressive or anxiety symptoms. Not all individuals with
nighttime sleep disturbances are distressed or have functional impairment. For example, sleep
continuity is often interrupted in healthy olde r adults who nevertheless identify themselves
as good sleepers. A diagnosis of insomnia disorder should be reserved for those individuals
with significant daytime distress or impairment related to their nighttime sleep difficulties.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
Insomnia is often associated  with physiological and cognitive arousal and conditioning
factors that interfere with sleep. A preoccupati on with sleep and distress due to the inabil-
ity to sleep may lead to a vicious cycle: the more the individual strives to sleep, the more
frustration builds and further im pairs sleep. Thus, excessive attention and efforts to sleep,
which override normal sleep-onset mechanisms, may contribute to the development of in-
somnia. Individuals with  persistent insomnia may also acquire maladapt ive sleep habits
(e.g., spending excessive time in bed; following an erratic sleep schedule; napping) and
cognitions (e.g., fear of sleeplessness; apprehensions of daytime impairments; clock mon-
itoring) during the course of the disorder. Engaging in such activities in an environment in
which the individual has frequently spent sleepless nights may further compound the con-
ditioned arousal and perpetuate sleep difficulties. Conversely, the individual may fall asleep
more easily when not trying to do so. Some individuals also report better sleep when away
from their own bedrooms and their usual routines. 
Insomnia may be accompanied by a variety of daytime complaints and symptoms, in-
cluding fatigue, decreased en ergy, and mood disturbances. Symptoms of anxiety or de-
pression that do not meet criteria for a specif ic mental disorder may be present, as well as
an excessive focus on the perceived effect s of sleep loss on daytime functioning. 
Individuals with inso mnia may have elevated scores on self-report psychological or
personality inventories with profiles indicati ng mild depression and anxiety, a worrisome
cognitive style, an emotion-focused and intern alizing style of conflict resolution, and a so-
matic focus. Patterns of neurocognitive impairment among individuals with insomnia dis-
order are inconsistent, although  there may be impairments in performing tasks of higher
complexity and those requiring frequent ch anges in performance strategy. Individuals
with insomnia often require more effo rt to maintain cognitive performance.
Prevalence
Population-based estimates indicate that about one-third of adults report insomnia symp-
toms, 10%–15% experience associated daytime impairments, and 6%–10% have symptoms
Insomnia Disorder 365
that meet criteria for insomnia  disorder. Insomnia disorder is the most prevalent of all
sleep disorders. In primary care settings, approximately 10%–20% of individuals complain
of significant insomnia symp toms. Insomnia is a more prevalent complaint among fe-
males than among males, with a gender ratio of about 1.44:1. Although insomnia can be a
symptom or an independent disorder, it is mo st frequently observed as a comorbid con-
dition with another medical condition or ment al disorder. For instance, 40%–50% of indi-
viduals with insomnia also present with a comorbid mental disorder. 
Development and Course
The onset of insomnia symptoms  can occur at any time during life, but the first episode is
more common in young adulthood. Less frequently, insomnia begins in childhood or ad-
olescence. In women, new-onset insomnia may occur during menopause and persist even
after other symptoms (e.g., hot flashes) have resolved. Insomnia may have a late-life onset,
which is often associated with the onse t of other health-related conditions. 
Insomnia can be situational, persistent, or recurrent. Situational or  acute insomnia usu-
ally lasts a few days or a few weeks and is often associated with life events or rapid changes
in sleep schedules or environment. It usually resolves once the initial precipitating event
subsides. For some individuals, perhaps those more vulnerable to sl eep disturbances, in-
somnia may persist long after the initial trigge ring event, possibly because of conditioning
factors and heightened arousal. The factors that precipitate insomnia may differ from
those that perpetuate it. For example, an in dividual who is bedridden with a painful injury
and has difficulty sleeping may then develop negative associations for sleep. Conditioned
arousal may then persist and lead to persiste nt insomnia. A similar course may develop in
the context of an acute psychological stress or a mental disorder. For instance, insomnia that
occurs during an episode of major depressive disorder can become a focus of attention,
with consequent negative conditioning, and pe rsist even after resolution of the depressive
episode. In some cases, insomnia may also have an insidious onse t without any identifi-
able precipitating factor. 
The course of insomnia may also be episodic,  with recurrent episodes of sleep difficul-
ties associated with the occurrence of stress ful events. Chronicity rates range from 45%
to 75% for follow-ups of 1–7 years. Even wh en the course of the insomnia has become
chronic, there is night-to -night variability in sleep patterns, with an occasional restful night’s
sleep interspersed with several nights of poor sleep. The characteristics of insomnia may
also change over time. Many individuals with insomnia have a history of “light” or easily
disturbed sleep prior to onset of more persistent sleep problems.
Insomnia complaints are mo re prevalent among middle-age and older adults. The type
of insomnia symptom changes as a function of age, with difficulties initiating sleep being
more common among young adults and proble ms maintaining sleep occurring more fre-
quently among middle-age and older individuals. 
Difficulties initiating and maintaining sleep can also occur in children and adolescents,
but there are more limited data on prevalence, risk factors, and comorbidity during these
developmental phases of the lifespan. Sleep diff iculties in childhood can result from con-
ditioning factors (e.g., a child who does not lear n to fall asleep or return to sleep without
the presence of a parent) or from the absence of consistent sleep schedules and bedtime
routines. Insomnia in adolescenc e is often triggered or exacer bated by irregular sleep sched-
ules (e.g., phase delay). In both children an d adolescents, psycholo gical and medical fac-
tors can contribute to insomnia.
The increased prevalence of insomnia in olde r adults is partly explained by the higher
incidence of physical health problems with aging. Changes in sleep patterns associated with
the normal developmental process must be diff erentiated from those exceeding age-related
changes. Although polysomnography is of limit ed value in the routine evaluation of in-
somnia, it may be more useful in the differen tial diagnosis among older adults because the
etiologies of insomnia (e.g., sleep apnea) are more often identifiable in older individuals.
366 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
While the risk and prognostic factors discussed in this section increase vulnerability to in-
somnia, sleep disturbances are more likely to  occur when predisposed individuals are ex-
posed to precipitating events, such as major lif e events (e.g., illness, separation) or less
severe but more chronic daily stress. Most individuals resume normal sleep patterns after
the initial triggering event ha s disappeared, but others—perha ps those more vulnerable to
insomnia—continue experiencing persistent sleep difficulties. Perpetuating factors such as
poor sleep habits, irregular sleep scheduling, an d the fear of not sleeping feed into the in-
somnia problem and may contribute to a vicious  cycle that may induce persistent insomnia.
Temperamental. Anxiety or worry-prone personality or cognitive styles, increased arousal
predisposition, and tendency to repress emot ions can increase vulne rability to insomnia.
Environmental. Noise, light, uncomfortably high or low temperature, and high altitude
may also increase vulnerability to insomnia.
Genetic and physiological. Female gender and advancing age are associated with in-
creased vulnerability to insomn ia. Disrupted sleep and insomnia display a familial dispo-
sition. The prevalence of insomnia is hi gher among monozygoti c twins relative to
dizygotic twins; it is also higher in first-degree family members comp ared with the general
population. The extent to which this link is  inherited through a genetic predisposition,
learned by observations of pare ntal models, or established as  a by-product of another psy-
chopathology remains undetermined.
Course modifiers. Deleterious course modifiers incl ude poor sleep hygiene practices
(e.g., excessive caffeine use,  irregular sleep schedules).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Insomnia is a more prevalent complaint among females than among males, with first onset
often associated with the birth of a new child or with menopause. Despite higher preva-
lence among older females, polysomnographic studies su ggest better preservation of
sleep continuity and slow-wave sleep in  older females than in older males.
Diagnostic Markers
Polysomnography usually shows impairments of sleep continuity (e.g., increased sleep la-
tency and time awake after sleep onset and de creased sleep efficiency [percentage of time
in bed asleep] and may show increased stage 1 sleep and decreased stages 3 and 4 sleep.
The severity of these sleep im pairments does not always ma tch the individual’s clinical
presentation or subjective complaint of poor sleep, as individuals with insomnia often un-
derestimate sleep duration and overestimate wakefulness relative to polysomnography.
Quantitative electroencephalographic analyses  may indicate that individuals with insom-
nia have greater high-frequency electroencepha lography power relative to good sleepers
both around the sleep onset period and duri ng non–rapid eye movement sleep, a feature
suggestive of increased cortical arousal. Individual s with insomnia disorder may have a
lower sleep propensity and typically do not show increased daytime sleepiness on objec-
tive sleep laboratory measures compared wi th individuals without sleep disorders. 
Other laboratory measures show evidence, although not consistently, of increased
arousal and a generalized activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (e.g., in-
creased cortisol levels, heart rate  variability, reactivity to stre ss, metabolic rate). In general,
findings are consistent with the hypothesis that increased physiological and cognitive
arousal plays a significant role in insomnia disorder.
Individuals with insomnia di sorder may appear either fatigued or haggard or, con-
versely, overaroused and “wired.” However, there are no consistent or characteristic
abnormalities on physical examination. Ther e may be an increased incidence of stress-
Insomnia Disorder 367
related psychophysiological symptoms (e.g., tension headache, muscle tension or pain,
gastrointestinal symptoms).
Functional Consequences  of Insomnia Disorder
Interpersonal, social, and occupational problems may develop as a result of insomnia or
excessive concern with sleep, increased daytim e irritability, and poor concentration. De-
creased attention and concentrat ion are common and may be related to higher rates of ac-
cidents observed in insomnia. Persistent in somnia is also associated with long-term
consequences, including increased risks of ma jor depressive disorder, hypertension, and
myocardial infarction; increased absenteeism and reduced productivity at work; reduced
quality of life; and increased economic burden. 
Differential Diagnosis
Normal sleep variations. Normal sleep duration varies considerably across individuals.
Some individuals who require little sleep (“short sleepers”) may be concerned about their
sleep duration. Short sl eepers differ from individuals with insomnia disorder by the lack of
difficulty falling or staying asleep and by the absence of characteristic daytime symptoms
(e.g., fatigue, concentration pr oblems, irritability). However,  some short sleepers may desire
or attempt to sleep for a longer period of time and, by prolonging time in bed, may create an
insomnia-like sleep pattern. Clinical insomnia  also should be distinguished from normal,
age-related sleep changes. Insomnia must also be distinguished from sleep deprivation due
to inadequate opportunity or circumstance for sleep resulting, for example, from an emer-
gency or from professional or  family obligations forcing th e individual to stay awake. 
Situational/acute insomnia. Situational/acute insomnia  is a condition lasting a few days
to a few weeks, often associated with life events  or with changes in sleep schedules. These
acute or short-term insomnia symptoms may also produce si gnificant distress and inter-
fere with social, personal, and occupational functioning. When such symptoms are fre-
quent enough and meet all other criteria exce pt for the 3-month duration, a diagnosis of
other specified insomnia disorder or unspecified insomnia disorder is made.
Delayed sleep phase and shift work types of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder.
Individuals with the delayed sleep phase type of circadian rhythm sl eep-wake disorder re-
port sleep-onset insomnia only when they try to  sleep at socially normal times, but they do
not report difficulty falling asleep or stayin g asleep when their bed and rising times are
delayed and coincide with thei r endogenous circadian rhythm. Shift work type differs from
insomnia disorder by the history of recent shift work. 
Restless legs syndrome. Restless legs syndrome often produces difficulties initiating
and maintaining sleep. However, an urge to move the legs and any accompanying unpleas-
ant leg sensations are features that differentiate this disorder fr om insomnia disorder. 
Breathing-related sleep disorders. Most individuals with a breathing-related sleep dis-
order have a history of loud snoring, breath ing pauses during sleep, and excessive daytime
sleepiness. Nonetheless, as many as 50% of individuals with sleep apnea may also report
insomnia symptoms, a feature that is more  common among females and older adults.
Narcolepsy. Narcolepsy may cause insomnia complaints but is distinguished from in-
somnia disorder by the predominance of sy mptoms of excessive daytime sleepiness, cat-
aplexy, sleep paralysis, and sleep-related hallucinations.
Parasomnias. Parasomnias are characterized by a comp laint of unusual behavior or events
during sleep that may lead to intermittent  awakenings and difficulty resuming sleep.
However, it is these behavioral events, rather than the insomnia per se, that dominate the
clinical picture. 
368 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Substance/medication-induced sl eep disorder, insomnia type. Substance/medication-
induced sleep disorder, insomnia type, is distinguished from insomnia disorder by the fact
that a substance (i.e., a drug of abuse, a medica tion, or exposure to a toxin) is judged to be
etiologically related to the insomnia (see  “Substance/Medicatio n-Induced Sleep Disor-
der” later in this chapter). Fo r example, insomnia occurring only in the context of heavy
coffee consumption would be diagnosed as caffeine-induced sleep disorder, insomnia
type, with onset during intoxication.
Comorbidity
Insomnia is a common comorbidity of many medical conditions, including diabetes, cor-
onary heart disease, chronic obstructive pulm onary disease, arthritis, fibromyalgia, and
other chronic pain conditions. The risk relati onship appears to be bidirectional: insomnia
increases the risk of medical conditions, and medical problems increase the risk of insom-
nia. The direction of the relationship is not always clear and may change over time; for this
reason, comorbid insomnia is the preferred terminology in th e presence of coexisting in-
somnia with another medical co ndition (or mental disorder).
Individuals with insomnia disorder frequent ly have a comorbid mental disorder, par-
ticularly bipolar, depressive, and anxiety diso rders. Persistent insomnia represents a risk
factor or an early symptom of subsequent bi polar, depressive, anxi ety, and substance use
disorders. Individuals with insomnia may misuse medicati ons or alcohol to help with
nighttime sleep, anxiolytics to combat tension or anxiety, and caffeine or other stimulants
to combat excessive fatigue. In addition to worsening the insomnia, this type of substance
use may in some cases progress to a substance use disorder.
Relationship to Internat ional Classification of 
Sleep Disorders
There are several distinct inso mnia phenotypes relating to the perceived source of the in-
somnia that are recognized by the International Classifica tion of Sleep Disorders,  2nd Edition
(ICSD-2). These include psychophysiological insomnia,  idiopathic insomnia,  sleep-state mispercep-
tion, and inadequate sleep hygiene.  Despite their clinical appeal and heuristic value, there is
limited evidence to support these distinct phenotypes.
Hypersomnolence Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 307.44 (F51.11)
A. Self-reported excessive sleepiness (hypersomnolence) despite a main sleep period
lasting at least 7 hours, with at least one of the following symptoms: 
1. Recurrent periods of sleep or lapses into sleep within the same day.
2. A prolonged main sleep episode of more than 9 hours per day that is nonrestorative
(i.e., unrefreshing).
3. Difficulty being fully awake after abrupt awakening.
B. The hypersomnolence occurs at least three times per week, for at least 3 months.
C. The hypersomnolence is accompanied by si gnificant distress or impairment in cogni-
tive, social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. 
D. The hypersomnolence is not better explai ned by and does not occur exclusively during
the course of another sleep disorder (e.g., narcolepsy, breathing-related sleep disor-
der, circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder, or a parasomnia).
E. The hypersomnolence is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance
(e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication).
Hypersomnolence Disorder 369
F. Coexisting mental and medical disorders do not adequately explain the predominant
complaint of hypersomnolence.
Specify if:
With mental disorder , including substance use disorders
With medical condition
With another sleep disorder
Coding note: The code 307.44 (F51.11) applies to all three specifiers. Code also the
relevant associated mental disorder, medi cal condition, or other sleep disorder im-
mediately after the code for hypersomnolence disorder in order to indicate the associ-
ation.
Specify if:
Acute:  Duration of less than 1 month.
Subacute:  Duration of 1–3 months.
Persistent:  Duration of more than 3 months.
Specify current severity:
Specify severity based on degree of difficulty maintaining daytime alertness as manifested
by the occurrence of multiple attacks of irresistible sleepiness within any given day occur-
ring, for example, while sedentary, driving, visiting with friends, or working. 
Mild:  Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 1–2 days/week.
Moderate: Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 3–4 days/week.
Severe:  Difficulty maintaining daytime alertness 5–7 days/week.
Diagnostic Features
Hypersomnolence  is a broad diagnostic term and incl udes symptoms of excessive quantity
of sleep (e.g., extended nocturnal sleep or involuntary daytime sleep),  deteriorated quality
of wakefulness (i.e., sleep propensity duri ng wakefulness as shown by difficulty awaken-
ing or inability to remain awake when required ), and sleep inertia (i.e., a period of im-
paired performance and reduced vigilance following awakening from the regular sleep
episode or from a nap) (Criterion A). Indivi duals with this disorder fall asleep quickly and
have a good sleep efficiency (>90%). They may have difficulty waking up in the morning,
sometimes appearing confused, co mbative, or ataxic. This pr olonged impairment of alert-
ness at the sleep-wake transition  is often referred to as sleep inertia  (i.e., sleep drunkenness).
It can also occur upon awaken ing from a daytime nap. During that period, the individual
appears awake, but there is a decline in moto r dexterity, behavior may be very inappro-
priate, and memory deficits, di sorientation in time and spac e, and feelings of grogginess
may occur. This period may last some minutes to hours. 
The persistent need for sleep can lead to auto matic behavior (usually of a very routine,
low-complexity type) that the individual carrie s out with little or no subsequent recall. For
example, individuals may find themselves having driven several miles from where they
thought they were, unaware of the “automatic”  driving they did in the preceding minutes.
For some individuals with hypersomnolence disorder, the major sleep episode (for most
individuals, nocturnal sleep) has a duration of 9 hours or more. However, the sleep is often
nonrestorative and is followed by difficulty awakening in the morning. For other individ-
uals with hypersomnolence disorder, the majo r sleep episode is of normal nocturnal sleep
duration (6–9 hours). In these cases, the excessive sleepiness is characterized by several un-
intentional daytime naps. These daytime naps tend to be relatively long (often lasting 1 hour
or more), are experienced as no nrestorative (i.e., unrefreshing),  and do not lead to improved
alertness. Individuals with hypersomnolence have daytime naps near ly everyday regard-
less of the nocturnal sleep duration. Subjective  sleep quality may or may not be reported as
good. Individuals typically feel sleepiness developing over a period of time, rather than
370 Sleep-Wake Disorders
experiencing a sudden sleep “attack.” Unintent ional sleep episodes typically occur in low-
stimulation and low-activity situations (e.g ., while attending lectures, reading, watching
television, or driving long dist ances), but in more severe cases they can manifest in high-
attention situations such as at work, in meetings, or at social gatherings.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Nonrestorative sleep, automatic behavior, di fficulties awakening in the morning, and
sleep inertia, although common in hypersomnolence disorder, may also be seen in a variety
of conditions, including narcolepsy. Appr oximately 80% of indi viduals with hyper-
somnolence report that their sleep is nonres torative, and as many have difficulties awak-
ening in the morning. Sleep inertia, thou gh less common (i.e., observed in 36%–50% of
individuals with hypersomnolence disorder), is highly specific to hypersomnolence. Short
naps (i.e., duration of less than 30 minutes)  are often unrefreshing. Individuals with hy-
persomnolence often appear sleepy and may even  fall asleep in the clinician’s waiting
area. 
A subset of individuals with hypersomnolenc e disorder have a family history of hy-
persomnolence and also have symptoms of autonomic nervous system dysfunction, in-
cluding recurrent vascular-type headaches, reactivity of the peripheral vascular system
(Raynaud’s phenomenon), and fainting.
Prevalence
Approximately 5%–10% of individuals who cons ult in sleep disorders clinics with com-
plaints of daytime sleepiness are diagnosed as having hypersomnolence disorder. It is es-
timated that about 1% of the European and U.S. general population has episodes of sleep
inertia. Hypersomnolence occurs with relati vely equal frequency in males and females.
Development and Course
Hypersomnolence disorder has a persistent course, with a prog ressive evolution in the se-
verity of symptoms. In most extreme cases, sl eep episodes can last up to 20 hours. How-
ever, the average nighttime sleep duration is  around 9½ hours. While many individuals
with hypersomnolence are able to reduce their sleep time during working days, weekend
and holiday sleep is greatly increased (by up to 3 hours). Awakenings are very difficult
and accompanied by sleep inertia episodes in nearly 40% of cases. Hypersomnolence fully
manifests in most cases in late adolescence or early adulthood, with a mean age at onset of
17–24 years. Individuals with hypersomnolence disorder are diagnosed, on average, 10–15
years after the appearance of the firs t symptoms. Pediatric cases are rare. 
Hypersomnolence has a progressive onset, wi th symptoms beginning between ages 15
and 25 years, with a gradual progression over weeks to months. For most individuals, the
course is then persistent and stable, unless tr eatment is initiated. The development of other
sleep disorders (e.g., breathing-related sleep disorder) may worsen the degree of sleepi-
ness. Although hyperactivity may be one of th e presenting signs of daytime sleepiness in
children, voluntary napping increases with ag e. This normal phenomenon is distinct from
hypersomnolence.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Hypersomnolence can be increased te mporarily by psychological stress
and alcohol use, but they have not been documented as environmental precipitating
factors. Viral infections have been report ed to have preceded or accompanied hyper-
somnolence in about 10% of cases. Viral infections, such as HIV pneumonia, infectious
mononucleosis, and Guillain-Barré syndrome, can also evolve into hypersomnolence within
Hypersomnolence Disorder 371
months after the infection. Hypersomnolenc e can also appear within 6–18 months follow-
ing a head trauma. 
Genetic and physiological. Hypersomnolence may be fami lial, with an autosomal-
dominant mode of  inheritance. 
Diagnostic Markers
Nocturnal polysomnography demonstrates a no rmal to prolonged sleep duration, short
sleep latency, and normal to increased slee p continuity. The distribution of rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep is also normal. Sleep e fficiency is mostly greater than 90%. Some
individuals with hypersomnolence disorder have increased amounts of slow-wave sleep.
The multiple sleep latency te st documents sleep tendency, typically indicated by mean
sleep latency values of less than 8 minutes.  In hypersomnolence disorder, the mean sleep
latency is typically less than 10 minutes and fr equently 8 minutes or less. Sleep-onset REM
periods (SOREMPs; i.e., the occurrence of REM sleep within 20 minutes of sleep onset)
may be present but occur less than two time s in four to five nap opportunities. 
Functional Consequences of Hypersomnolence Disorder
The low level of alertness that occurs while an individual fights the need for sleep can lead
to reduced efficiency, diminished concentration, and poor memory during daytime activ-
ities. Hypersomnolence can lead to significan t distress and dysfunction in work and social
relationships. Prolonged nocturnal sleep and difficulty awakening can result in difficulty
in meeting morning obligations, such as arrivi ng at work on time. Unintentional daytime
sleep episodes can be embarrassing and even dangerous, if, for instance, the individual is
driving or operating machinery when the episode occurs. 
Differential Diagnosis
Normative variation in sleep. “Normal” sleep duration varies considerably in the general
population. “Long sleepers” (i.e., individuals who require a greater than average amount
of sleep) do not have excessive sleepiness, sleep  inertia, or automatic behavior when they
obtain their required amount of nocturnal sleep . Sleep is reported to be refreshing. If social
or occupational demands lead to shorter nocturnal sleep, daytime symptoms may appear.
In hypersomnolence disorder, by contrast, symp toms of excessive sleepiness occur regard-
less of nocturnal sleep duration. An inad equate amount of no cturnal sleep, or behaviorally
induced insufficient sleep syndrome,  can produce symptoms of daytime sleepiness very similar
to those of hypersomnolence. An average slee p duration of fewer than 7 hours per night
strongly suggests inadequate nocturnal sleep , and an average of more than 9–10 hours of
sleep per 24-hour period suggests hypersomnole nce. Individuals with inadequate noctur-
nal sleep typically “catch up” with longer sleep durations on days when they are free from
social or occupational demands or on vaca tions. Unlike hypersom nolence, insufficient
nocturnal sleep is unlikely to persist unabat ed for decades. A diagnosis of hypersomno-
lence disorder should not be made if there is  a question regarding the adequacy of noctur-
nal sleep duration. A diagnostic and therapeutic trial of sleep extension for 10–14 days can
often clarify the diagnosis.
Poor sleep quality and fatigue. Hypersomnolence disorder should be distinguished
from excessive sleepiness related to insufficient  sleep quantity or quality and fatigue (i.e.,
tiredness not necessarily relieved by increase d sleep and unrelated to sleep quantity or
quality). Excessive sleepiness and fatigue ar e difficult to differentiate and may overlap
considerably. 
Breathing-related sleep disorders. Individuals with hypersomnolence and breathing-
related sleep disorders may have similar patterns of excessive sleepiness. Breathing-
372 Sleep-Wake Disorders
related sleep disorders are suggested by a hist ory of loud snoring, pauses in breathing
during sleep, brain injury, or cardiovascular disease and by the presence of obesity, oro-
pharyngeal anatomical abnormalities, hyperten sion, or heart failure on physical examina-
tion. Polysomnographic studies can confirm the presence of apneic events in breathing-
related sleep disorder (and their ab sence in hypersomnolence disorder).
Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders. Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders are
often characterized by daytime sleepiness. A  history of an abnormal sleep-wake schedule
(with shifted or irregular hours) is present in individuals with a circadian rhythm sleep-
wake disorder. 
Parasomnias. Parasomnias rarely produce the prol onged, undisturbed nocturnal sleep
or daytime sleepiness characterist ic of hypersomnolence disorder.
Other mental disorders. Hypersomnolence disorder must be distinguished from mental
disorders that include hypersomnolence as an essential or associated fe ature. In particular,
complaints of daytime sleepiness may occur in a major depressive  episode, with atypical fea-
tures, and in the depressed phase of bipolar di sorder. Assessment for ot her mental disorders is
essential before a diagnosis of hypersomnolence disorder is co nsidered. A diagnosis of hyper-
somnolence disorder can be made in the presence  of another current or past mental disorder. 
Comorbidity
Hypersomnolence can be associated with depressive disorders, bipolar disorders (during a
depressive episode), and major depressive disorder, with seas onal pattern. Many individu-
als with hypersomnolence disorder have symptoms  of depression that may meet criteria for
a depressive disorder. This presentation may be  related to the psycho social consequences of
persistent increased sleep need. Individuals with hypersomnolence disorder are also at
risk for substance-related disord ers, particularly related to self-medication with stimulants.
This general lack of specificity may contribu te to very heterogeneous profiles among indi-
viduals whose symptoms meet the same diagnostic criteria for hypersomnolence disorder.
Neurodegenerative conditions, such as Alzhei mer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and mul-
tiple system atrophy, may also be associated with hypersomnolence. 
Relationship to Internat ional Classification of 
Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders,  2nd Edition (ICSD-2), differentiates nine
subtypes of “hypersomnias of central origin ,” including recurrent  hypersomnia (Kleine-
Levin syndrome).
Narcolepsy
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recurrent periods of an irrepressible need to sleep, lapsing into sleep, or napping oc-
curring within the same day. These must have been occurring at least three times per
week over the past 3 months. 
B. The presence of at least one of the following:
1. Episodes of cataplexy, defined as either (a) or (b), occurring at least a few times
per month: 
a. In individuals with long-standing disease, brief (seconds to minutes) episodes
of sudden bilateral loss of muscle tone with maintained consciousness that are
precipitated by laughter or joking.
Narcolepsy 373
b. In children or in individuals within 6 months of onset, spontaneous grimaces or
jaw-opening episodes with tongue thrusting or a global hypotonia, without any
obvious emotional triggers.
2. Hypocretin deficiency, as measured usi ng cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hypocretin-1
immunoreactivity values (less than or equal to one-third of values obtained in
healthy subjects tested using the same assay, or less than or equal to 110 pg/mL).
Low CSF levels of hypocretin-1 must not be observed in the context of acute brain
injury, inflammation, or infection.
3. Nocturnal sleep polysomnography showing rapid eye movement (REM) sleep la-
tency less than or equal to 15 minutes, or a multiple sleep latency test showing a
mean sleep latency less than or equal to 8 minutes and two or more sleep-onset
REM periods.
Specify whether:
347.00 (G47.419) Na rcolepsy without cataplexy but  with hypocretin deficiency:  Cri-
terion B requirements of low CSF hypocretin-1 levels and positive polysomnography/
multiple sleep latency test are met, but no cataplexy is present (Criterion B1 not met).
347.01 (G47.411) Narcolepsy with cataplexy but without hypocretin deficiency:
In this rare subtype (less than 5% of narcolepsy cases), Criterion B requirements of
cataplexy and positive polysomnography/multiple sleep latency test are met, but CSF
hypocretin-1 levels are normal (Criterion B2 not met).
347.00 (G47.419) Autosomal dominant cereb ellar ataxia, deafness, and narco-
lepsy:  This subtype is caused by exon 21 DNA (cytosine-5)-methyltransferase-1 mu-
tations and is characterized by late-onset (age 30–40 years) narcolepsy (with low or
intermediate CSF hypocretin-1 levels), deafness, cerebellar ataxia, and eventually de-
mentia. 
347.00 (G47.419) Autosomal dominant narcolepsy, obesity, and type 2 diabetes:
Narcolepsy, obesity, and type 2 diabetes and low CSF hypocretin-1 levels have been
described in rare cases and are associated with a mutation in the myelin oligodendro-
cyte glycoprotein gene.
347.10 (G47.429) Narcolepsy secondary to a nother medical condition:  This sub-
type is for narcolepsy that develops secondary to medical conditions that cause infec-
tious (e.g., Whipple’s disease, sarcoidosis), traumatic, or tumoral destruction of
hypocretin neurons.
Coding note  (for ICD-9-CM code 347.10 only): Code first the underlying medical con-
dition (e.g., 040.2 Whipple’s disease; 347.10 narcolepsy secondary to Whipple’s dis-
ease).
Specify current severity:
Mild:  Infrequent cataplexy (less than once per week), need for naps only once or twice
per day, and less disturbed nocturnal sleep.
Moderate: Cataplexy once daily or every few days, disturbed nocturnal sleep, and
need for multiple naps daily.
Severe:  Drug-resistant cataplexy with multiple attacks daily, nearly constant sleepi-
ness, and disturbed nocturnal sleep (i.e., movements, insomnia, and vivid dreaming).
Subtypes
In narcolepsy without cataplexy but with hypocretin deficiency, unclear “cataplexy-like”
symptoms may be reported (e.g., the symptoms are not triggered by emotions and are un-
usually long lasting). In extremely rare cases,  cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of hypocre-
tin-1 are low, and polysomnographic/multiple sleep latency test (MSLT) results are
negative: repeating the test is advised before  establishing the subtype diagnosis. In narco-
374 Sleep-Wake Disorders
lepsy with cataplexy but withou t hypocretin deficiency, test  results for human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) DQB1*06:02 may be negative. Seiz ures, falls of other origin, and conversion
disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder) should be excluded. In narcolepsy
secondary to infectious (e.g., Whipple’s dise ase, sarcoidosis), traumatic, or tumoral de-
struction of hypocretin neuron s, test results for HLA DQB1* 06:02 may be positive and may
result from the insult triggeri ng the autoimmune process. In other cases, the destruction of
hypocretin neurons may be secondary to trau ma or hypothalamic surgery. Head trauma
or infections of the central nervous system can, however, produce tran sitory decreases in
CSF hypocretin-1 levels without hypocret in cell loss, complicating the diagnosis.
Diagnostic Features
The essential features of sleepiness in narcolep sy are recurrent daytime naps or lapses into
sleep. Sleepiness typica lly occurs daily but must occur at a minimum three times a week
for at least 3 months (Criterion A). Narcolep sy generally produces cataplexy, which most
commonly presents as brief episodes (seconds to minutes) of sudden, bilateral loss of mus-
cle tone precipitated by emotions, typically  laughing and joking. Muscles affected may
include those of the neck, jaw, arms, legs, or  whole body, resulting in head bobbing, jaw
dropping, or complete falls. Individuals are awake and aware during cataplexy. To meet
Criterion B1(a), cataplexy must be triggered by  laughter or joking and must occur at least
a few times per month when the condition is untreated or in the past.
Cataplexy should not be confused with “wea kness” occurring in the context of athletic
activities (physiological) or ex clusively after unusual emotiona l triggers such as stress or
anxiety (suggesting possible psychopathology). Episodes lasting hours or days, or those not
triggered by emotions, are unlikely to be cata plexy, nor is rolling on the floor while laugh-
ing hysterically.
In children close to onset, genuine cataplexy can be atypical, affecting primarily the
face, causing grimaces or jaw opening with tongue thrusting (“cataplectic faces”). Alter-
natively, cataplexy may present as low-grad e continuous hypotonia, yielding a wobbling
walk. In these cases, Criterion B1(b) can be met in children or in individuals within 6 months
of a rapid onset.
Narcolepsy-cataplexy nearly always results from the loss of hypothalamic hypocretin
(orexin)–producing cells, causin g hypocretin deficiency (less than or equal to one-third of
control values, or 110 pg/mL in most laboratori es). Cell loss is likely autoimmune, and ap-
proximately 99% of affected individuals carry HLA-DQB1*06:02 (vs. 12%–38% of control
subjects). Thus, checking  for the presence of DQB1*06:02 pr ior to a lumbar puncture for eval-
uation of CSF hypocretin-1 immu noreactivity may be useful. Ra rely, low CSF levels of hypo-
cretin-1 occur without cataplexy, notably in youths who may develop cataplexy later. CSF
hypocretin-1 measurement represents the gold standard, excepting associated severe con-
ditions (neurological, inflammatory, infectious , trauma) that can inte rfere with the assay.
A nocturnal polysomnographic sleep study followed by an MSLT can also be used to
confirm the diagnosis (Criterion B3). These tests must be performed after the individual
has stopped all psychotropic medications, fo llowing 2 weeks of adequate sleep time (as
documented with sleep diaries, actigraphy). Short rapid eye movement (REM) latency
(sleep-onset REM period, REM latency less than  or equal to 15 minutes) during polysom-
nography is sufficient to confirm the diagnosi s and meets Criterion B3. Alternatively, the
MSLT result must be positive, showing a mean sleep latency of less than or equal to 8 min-
utes and two or more sleep-onset REM periods in four to five naps.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
When sleepiness is severe, automatic behavior s may occur, with the individual continuing
his or her activities in a semi-automatic, ha zelike fashion without memory or conscious-
ness. Approximately 20%–60% of individuals experience vivid hypnagogic hallucinations
Narcolepsy 375
before or upon falling asleep or hypnopompic  hallucinations just after awakening. These
hallucinations are distinct from the less vivid, nonhallucinatory dreamlike mentation at
sleep onset that occurs in normal sleepers.  Nightmares and vivid dreaming are also fre-
quent in narcolepsy, as is REM sleep behavior disorder. Approximately 20%–60% of indi-
viduals experience sleep paralysis upon falling asleep or awakening, leaving them awake
but unable to move or speak. However, many  normal sleepers also report sleep paralysis,
especially with stress or slee p deprivation. Nocturnal eating  may occur. Obesity is com-
mon. Nocturnal sleep disruption with freque nt long or short awakenings is common and
can be disabling.
Individuals may appear sleepy or fall asleep in the waiting area or during clinical ex-
amination. During cataplexy, individuals may slump in a chair and have slurred speech or
drooping eyelids. If the clinician has time to  check reflexes during cataplexy (most attacks
are less than 10 seconds), reflexes are abo lished—an important finding distinguishing gen-
uine cataplexy from conversion disorder. 
Prevalence
Narcolepsy-cataplexy affects 0.02%–0.04% of the general population in most countries.
Narcolepsy affects both genders, with possibly a slight male preponderance. 
Development and Course 
Onset is typically in children and adolescents/young adults but rarely in older adults.
Two peaks of onset are suggested, at ages 15–25 years and ages 30–35 years. Onset can be
abrupt or progressive (over years). Severity is highest when onset is abrupt in children,
and then decreases with age or with treatment, so that symptoms such as cataplexy can oc-
casionally disappear. Abrupt onset in young, prepubescent children can be associated
with obesity and premature puberty, a phenotype more frequently observed since 2009. In
adolescents, onset is more difficu lt to pinpoint. Onset in adults is often unclear, with some
individuals reporting having ha d excessive sleepiness since bi rth. Once the disorder has
manifested, the course is persistent and lifelong.
In 90% of cases, the first symptom to manife st is sleepiness or in creased sleep, followed
by cataplexy (within 1 year in 50% of cases, within 3 years in 85%). Sleepiness, hypnagogic
hallucinations, vivid dreaming , and REM sleep behavior disorder (excessive movements
during REM sleep) are early symptoms. Excessiv e sleep rapidly progresses to an inability
to stay awake during the day, and to maintain  good sleep at night, without a clear increase
in total 24-hour sleep needs. In the first months, cataplexy may be atypical, especially in
children. Sleep paralysis usually develops ar ound puberty in child ren with prepubertal
onset. Exacerbations of symptoms suggest la ck of compliance with medications or devel-
opment of a concurrent sleep disorder, notably sleep apnea.
Young children and adolescents with narcolepsy often develop a ggression or behav-
ioral problems secondary to sleepiness and/ or nighttime sleep disruption. Workload and
social pressure increase thro ugh high school and college, reducing available sleep time at
night. Pregnancy does not seem  to modify symptoms consisten tly. After retirement, indi-
viduals typically have more opportunity for napping, reducing the need for stimulants.
Maintaining a regular schedule benefits individuals at all ages. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Parasomnias, such as sleepwalking, bruxism, REM sleep behavior dis-
order, and enuresis, may be more common in  individuals who deve lop narcolepsy. Indi-
viduals commonly report that they need more sleep than other family members. 
Environmental. Group A streptococcal throat infect ion, influenza (notably pandemic
H1N1 2009), or other winter infections are lik ely triggers of the autoimmune process, pro-
376 Sleep-Wake Disorders
ducing narcolepsy a few months later. Head trauma and abrupt changes in sleep-wake
patterns (e.g., job changes, stress) may be additional triggers. 
Genetic and physiological. Monozygotic twins are 25%–32% concordant for narcolepsy.
The prevalence of narcolepsy is 1%–2% in firs t-degree relatives (a 10- to 40-fold increase
overall). Narcolepsy is strongly  associated with DQB1*06:02  (99% vs. 12%–38% in control
subjects of various ethnic gr oups; 25% in the general U.S. population). DQB1*03:01 in-
creases, while DQB1*05:01, DQB1*06:01, and DQB1*06:03 reduce risk in the presence of
DQB1*06:02, but the effect is small. Polymorphisms within the T-cell receptor alpha gene
and other immune modulating gene s also modulate risk slightly.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Narcolepsy has been described in all ethnic groups and in many cultures. Among African
Americans, more cases present without cataplexy or with atypical cataplexy, complicating
diagnosis, especially in the presence of obesity and obstructive sleep apnea.
Diagnostic Markers
Functional imaging suggests impaired hypo thalamic responses to humorous stimuli.
Nocturnal polysomnography followed by an MS LT is used to confirm the diagnosis of
narcolepsy, especially when the disorder is first being diagnosed and before treatment has
begun, and if hypocretin deficiency has not been documented biochemically. The poly-
somnography/MSLT should be performed after the individual is no longer taking any
psychotropic drugs and after re gular sleep-wake patterns, with out shift work or sleep de-
privation, have been documented.
A sleep-onset REM period during the poly somnography (REM sleep latency less than
or equal to 15 minutes) is highly specific (a pproximately 1% positive in control subjects)
but moderately sensitive (approximately 50%). A positive MSLT  result displays an aver-
age sleep latency of less than or equal to 8 minutes, and sleep-onset REM periods in two or
more naps on a four- or five-nap test. The MS LT result is positive in 90%–95% of individ-
uals with narcolepsy versus 2%–4% of control subjects or individuals with other sleep dis-
orders. Additional polysomnographic findings often include frequent  arousals, decreased
sleep efficiency, and increased stage 1 sleep.  Periodic limb moveme nts (found in about
40% of individuals with narcolepsy) and sleep apnea are often noted.
Hypocretin deficiency is demonstrated by  measuring CSF hypocretin-1 immunoreac-
tivity. The test is particular ly useful in individuals with suspected conversion disorder
and those without typical cataplexy, or in treatment-refractory cases. The diagnostic value
of the test is not affected by medications, sleep deprivation, or circadian time, but the find-
ings are uninterpretable when the individual is severely ill with a concurrent infection or
head trauma or is comatose. CSF cytology, protein, and glucose are within normal range
even when sampled within weeks of rapid onse t. CSF hypocretin-1 in these incipient cases
is typically already very diminished or undetectable.
Functional Consequenc es of Narcolepsy 
Driving and working are impaired, and indivi duals with narcolepsy should avoid jobs
that place themselves (e.g., working with mach inery) or others (e.g., bus driver, pilot) in
danger. Once the narcolepsy is controlled wi th therapy, patients can usually drive, al-
though rarely long distances alone. Untreated individuals are also at risk for social isola-
tion and accidental injury to themselves or  others. Social relations may suffer as these
individuals strive to avert cataplexy by exerting control over emotions. 
Differential Diagnosis 
Other hypersomnias. Hypersomnolence and narcolepsy are similar with respect to the
degree of daytime sleepiness, age at onset, an d stable course over time but can be distin-
Narcolepsy 377
guished based on distinctive clinical and labo ratory features. Individuals with hypersom-
nolence typically have longer and less disrupted nocturnal sleep, greater difficulty
awakening, more persistent daytime sleepine ss (as opposed to more discrete “sleep at-
tacks” in narcolepsy), longer and less refreshing daytime sleep episodes, and little or no
dreaming during daytime naps. By contrast, individuals with narcolepsy have cataplexy
and recurrent intrusions of elements of REM sleep into the transition between sleep and
wakefulness (e.g., sleep-related hallucination s and sleep paralysis). The MSLT typically
demonstrates shorter sleep latenc ies (i.e., greater physiological  sleepiness) as well as the
presence of multiple sleep-onset REM periods in individuals with narcolepsy.
Sleep deprivation and insufficient nocturnal sleep. Sleep deprivation and insufficient
nocturnal sleep are common in adolescents and shift workers. In adolescents, difficulties
falling asleep at night are common, causing sleep deprivation. The MSLT result may be
positive if conducted while the individual is  sleep deprived or while his or her sleep is
phase delayed. 
Sleep apnea syndromes. Sleep apneas are especially likely in the presence of obesity.
Because obstructive sleep apnea is more freque nt than narcolepsy, ca taplexy may be over-
looked (or absent), and the individual is as sumed to have obstructive sleep apnea unre-
sponsive to usual therapies. 
Major depressive disorder. Narcolepsy or hypersomnia may be associated or confused
with depression. Cataplexy is not present in depression. The MSLT re sults are most often
normal, and there is dissociation between subj ective and objective sleepiness, as measured
by the mean sleep latency during the MSLT.
Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder). Atypical features,
such as long-lasting cataplexy or unusual tr iggers, may be present in conversion disorder
(functional neurological symptom disorder).  Individuals may report sleeping and dream-
ing, yet the MSLT does not show the characteristic sleep-onset REM period. Full-blown,
long-lasting pseudocataplexy may occur during consultation, allowing the examining
physician enough time to verify reflexes, which remain intact. 
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disord er or other behavioral problems. In children and
adolescents, sleepiness can ca use behavioral problems, including aggressiveness and in-
attention, leading to a misdiagnosis of attention-deficit/hype ractivity disorder.
Seizures. In young children, cataplexy can be misd iagnosed as seizures. Seizures are not
commonly triggered by emotions, and when they are, the trigger is not usually laughing or
joking. During a seizure, individuals are more  likely to hurt themselves when falling. Sei-
zures characterized by isolated atonia are rare ly seen in isolation of other seizures, and
they also have signatures on  the electroencephalogram. 
Chorea and movement disorders. In young children, cataplexy can be misdiagnosed as
chorea or pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal
infections, especially in the co ntext of a strep throat infectio n and high antistreptolysin O
antibody levels. Some children may have an overlapping movement d isorder close to on-
set of the cataplexy.
Schizophrenia. In the presence of florid and vivid hypnagogic hallucinations, individuals
may think these experiences are real—a feature that suggests schizophrenia. Similarly,
with stimulant treatment, pers ecutory delusions may develop. If cataplexy is present, the
clinician should first assume that these sympto ms are secondary to narcolepsy before con-
sidering a co-occurring diagnosis of schizophrenia. 
Comorbidity
Narcolepsy can co-occur with bipolar, depressi ve, and anxiety disorders, and in rare cases
with schizophrenia. Narcolepsy is also associ ated with increased body mass index or obe-
378 Sleep-Wake Disorders
sity, especially when the narcolepsy is untreated. Rapid weight gain is common in young
children with a sudden disease onset. Comorbid sleep apnea sh ould be considered if there
is a sudden aggravation of preexisting narcolepsy.
Relationship to Internat ional Classification of 
Sleep Disorders
The International Classificat ion of Sleep Disorders,  2nd Edition (ICSD-2), differentiates five
subtypes of narcolepsy.
Breathing-Related Sleep Disorders
The breathing-related sleep disorders category encompasses three relatively distinct dis-
orders: obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, ce ntral sleep apnea, an d sleep-related hypo-
ventilation. 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea
Diagnostic Criteria 327.23 (G47.33)
A. Either (1) or (2): 
1. Evidence by polysomnography of at least five obstructive apneas or hypopneas per
hour of sleep and either of the following sleep symptoms:
a. Nocturnal breathing disturbances: snor ing, snorting/gasping, or breathing
pauses during sleep.
b. Daytime sleepiness, fatigue, or unrefreshing sleep despite sufficient opportuni-
ties to sleep that is not better explained by another mental disorder (including a
sleep disorder) and is not attribut able to another medical condition.
2. Evidence by polysomnography of 15 or more obstructive apneas and/or hypopneas
per hour of sleep regardless of accompanying symptoms.
Specify current severity:
Mild:  Apnea hypopnea index is less than 15.
Moderate: Apnea hypopnea index is 15–30.
Severe:  Apnea hypopnea index is greater than 30.
Specifiers
Disease severity is measured by a count of  the number of apneas plus hypopneas per hour
of sleep (apnea hypopnea index) using polysomnography or other ov ernight monitoring.
Overall severity is also informed by levels of nocturnal desaturation and sleep fragmen-
tation (measured by brain cortical arousal frequency and sleep stages) and degree of as-
sociated symptoms and daytime impairment. However, the exact number and thresholds
may vary according to the specific measureme nt techniques used, and these numbers may
change over time. Regardless of the apnea hy popnea index (count) pe r se, the disorder is
considered to be more severe when apneas and hypopneas are accompanied by significant
oxygen hemoglobin desaturation (e.g., when more than 10% of the sleep time is spent at
desaturation levels of less than 90%) or wh en sleep is severely fragmented as shown by an
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea 379
elevated arousal index (arousal index greater th an 30) or reduced stages in deep sleep (e.g.,
percentage stage N3 [slow-wave sleep] less than 5%).
Diagnostic Features
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is the most  common breathing-related sleep disorder.
It is characterized by repeated episodes of upper (pharyngeal) airw ay obstruction (apneas
and hypopneas) during sleep. Apnea  refers to the total absence of airflow, and hypopnea  re-
fers to a reduction in airflow. Each apnea or  hypopnea represents a reduction in breathing
of at least 10 seconds in duration in adults or two missed breaths in children and is typi-
cally associated with drops in oxygen saturation  of 3% or greater and/or an electroenceph-
alographic arousal. Both sleep-related (nocturnal) and wake-time symptoms are common.
The cardinal symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea are snoring and daytime
sleepiness. 
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea in adults  is diagnosed on the basis of polysom-
nographic findings and symptoms. The diagnosis is based on symptoms of 1) nocturnal
breathing disturbances (i.e., snoring, snorti ng/gasping, breathing pauses during sleep), or
2) daytime sleepiness, fatigue, or unrefreshi ng sleep despite suffic ient opportunities to
sleep that are not better explained by another mental disorder and not attributable to an-
other medical condition, along with 3) eviden ce by polysomnography of five or more ob-
structive apneas or hypopneas per hour of sleep (Criterion A1). Diagnosis can be made in
the absence of these symptoms if there is evidence by polysomnography of 15 or more ob-
structive apneas and/or hypopneas pe r hour of sleep (Criterion A2). 
Specific attention to disturbe d sleep occurring in association with snoring or breathing
pauses and physical findings that increase ri sk of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea (e.g.,
central obesity, crowded pharyngeal airway, el evated blood pressure) is needed to reduce
the chance of misdiagnosing this treatable condition.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Because of the frequency of nocturnal awakenin gs that occur with obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea, individuals may report symptoms  of insomnia. Other common, though non-
specific, symptoms of obstructive sleep apne a hypopnea are heartbur n, nocturia, morning
headaches, dry mouth, erectile  dysfunction, and reduced li bido. Rarely, individuals may
complain of difficulty breathing while lying supine or sleeping. Hypertension may occur
in more than 60% of individuals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea.
Prevalence
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is a very common disorder, affecting at least 1%–2% of
children, 2%–15% of middle-age adults, and mo re than 20% of older individuals. In the
general community, prevalence  rates of undiagnosed obst ructive sleep apnea hypopnea
may be very high in elderly individuals. Sinc e the disorder is strongly associated with obe-
sity, increases in obesity rates are likely to be accompanied by an increased prevalence of
this disorder. Prevalen ce may be particularly high amon g males, older adults, and certain
racial/ethnic groups. In adults, the male-to-female ratio of obstructive sleep apnea hypop-
nea ranges from 2:1 to 4:1. Ge nder differences decline in olde r age, possibly because of an
increased prevalence in females after menopause. There is no gender difference among
prepubertal children.
Development and Course
The age distribution of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea likely follows a J-shaped distri-
bution. There is a peak in children ages 3–8 years when the nasopharynx may be compro-
mised by a relatively large mass of tonsillar tissue compared with the size of the upper
380 Sleep-Wake Disorders
airway. With growth of the airway and regression of lymphoid tissue during later child-
hood, there is reduction in prevalence. Then, as obesity prevalence increases in midlife and
females enter menopause, obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea again increases. The course
in older age is unclear; the disorder may level off after age 65 years, but in other individ-
uals, prevalence may increase with aging. Beca use there is some age dependency of the oc-
currence of apneas and hypopneas, polysomnog raphic results must be interpreted in light
of other clinical data. In particular, signific ant clinical symptoms of insomnia or hyper-
somnia should be investigated re gardless of the individual’s age.
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea usually ha s an insidious onset, gradual progression,
and persistent course. Typically the loud snorin g has been present for many years, often since
childhood, but an increase in its severity may lead the individual to seek evaluation. Weight
gain may precipitate an increase in sympto ms. Although obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea
can occur at any age, it most commonly mani fests among individuals ages 40–60 years. Over
4–5 years, the average apnea hypo pnea index increases in adults and older individuals by ap-
proximately two apneas/hypopneas per hour. Th e apnea hypopnea index is increased and in-
cident obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea is greater among indivi duals who are older, who are
male, or who have a higher baseline body mass  index (BMI) or increa se their BMI over time.
Spontaneous resolution of obstructive sleep ap nea hypopnea has been reported with weight
loss, particularly after bariatric surgery. In children, seasonal va riation in obstructive sleep ap-
nea hypopnea has been observed, as has improvement with overall growth.
In young children, the signs and symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea may be
more subtle than in adults, making diagnosis more difficult to establish. Polysomnography is
useful in confirming diagnosis. Evidence of  fragmentation of sleep on the polysomnogram
may not be as apparent as in studies of older individuals, possibly because of the high homeo-
static drive in young individuals. Symptoms su ch as snoring are usually parent-reported and
thus have reduced sensitivity. Agitated arousals and unusual sleep postures, such as sleeping
on the hands and knees, may oc cur. Nocturnal enuresis also may occur and should raise the
suspicion of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea if it recurs in a child who was previously dry at
night. Children may also manife st excessive daytime sleepiness, although this is not as com-
mon or pronounced as in adults. Daytime mouth breathing, difficulty in swallowing, and poor
speech articulation are also common features in children. Children younger than 5 years more
often present with nighttime symptoms, such as  observed apneas or labored breathing, than
with behavioral symptoms (i.e., the nighttime symptoms are more noticeable and more often
bring the child to clinical attention). In childre n older than 5 years, daytime symptoms such as
sleepiness and behavioral problems (e.g., impulsivity and hyperactivity), attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder, learning  difficulties, and morning head aches are more often the focus
of concern. Children with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also may present with failure to
thrive and developmental delays. In young children, obesity is a less common risk factor,
while delayed growth and “failure to thrive” may be present.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. The major risk factors for ob structive sleep apnea hypopnea
are obesity and male gender. Others include maxillary-mandi bular retrognathia or micro-
gnathia, positive family history of sleep apnea, genetic syndromes that reduce upper
airway patency (e.g., Down’s syndrome, Trea cher Collin’s syndrome), adenotonsillar hy-
pertrophy (especially in youn g children), menopause (in fema les), and various endocrine
syndromes (e.g., acromegaly). Compared with  premenopausal females, males are at in-
creased risk for obstruct ive sleep apnea hypopnea, possibly reflecting the influences of sex
hormones on ventilatory control and body fat distribution, as well as because of gender
differences in airway structure. Medication s for mental disorders and medical conditions
that tend to induce somnolence may worsen the course of apnea symptoms if these med-
ications are not managed carefully.
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea 381
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea has a strong  genetic basis, as evidenced by the sig-
nificant familial aggregation of the apnea hy popnea index. The prevalence of obstructive
sleep apnea hypopnea is approximately twice as high among the first-degree relatives of
probands with obstructive sleep apnea hypopn ea as compared with members of control
families. One-third of the variance in the apnea hypopnea index is explained by shared fa-
milial factors. Although genetic markers with diagnostic or prognostic value are not yet
available for use, eliciting a family history of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea should in-
crease the clinical suspicion for the disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There is a potential for sleepiness and fatigue to  be reported differently across cultures. In
some groups, snoring may be considered a si gn of health and thus may not trigger con-
cerns. Individuals of Asian ancestry may be at increased risk for obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea despite relatively low BMI, possibly reflecting the influence of craniofacial risk
factors that narrow the nasopharynx.
Gender-Related Issues 
Females may more commonly report fatigue rather than sleepiness and may underreport
snoring. 
Diagnostic Markers
Polysomnography provides quan titative data on frequency of sleep-related respiratory
disturbances and associated changes in oxygen saturation and sleep continuity. Polysom-
nographic findings in children differ from th ose in adults in that children demonstrate
labored breathing, partial obst ructive hypoventilation with cyclical desaturations, hyper-
capnia and paradoxical movements. Apnea hy popnea index levels as low as 2 are used to
define thresholds of abnormality in children.
Arterial blood gas measurements while the in dividual is awake are usually normal, but
some individuals can have waking hypoxemia or  hypercapnia. This pattern should alert the
clinician to the possibility of coexisting lung disease or hypoventilation. Imaging procedures
may reveal narrowing of the u pper airway. Cardiac testing ma y show evidence of impaired
ventricular function. Individuals with severe no cturnal oxygen desaturation may also have el-
evated hemoglobin or hematocrit values. Vali dated sleep measures (e.g., multiple sleep la-
tency test [MSLT], maintenance of wake fulness test) may identify sleepiness.
Functional Consequences of 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea
More than 50% of individuals with moderate  to severe obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea
report symptoms of daytime sleepiness. A twof old increased risk of occupational accidents
has been reported in association with sympto ms of snoring and slee piness. Motor vehicle
crashes also have been reported to be as mu ch as sevenfold higher among individuals with
elevated apnea hypopnea index values. Clinicians should be cognizant of state govern-
ment requirements for reporting this disorder , especially in relati onship to commercial
drivers. Reduced scores on measures of health -related quality of life are common in individ-
uals with obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, wi th the largest decrements observed in the
physical and vitality subscales.
Differential Diagnosis
Primary snoring and other sleep disorders. Individuals with obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea must be differentiat ed from individuals with primary snoring (i.e., otherwise
382 Sleep-Wake Disorders
asymptomatic individuals who snore and do not have abnorm alities on overnight polysom-
nography). Individuals with obstructive sl eep apnea hypopnea may additionally report
nocturnal gasping and choking. The presence of sleepiness or other daytime symptoms
not explained by other etiolo gies suggests the diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea hypop-
nea, but this differentiation requires polysomnography. Defi nitive differential diagnosis
between hypersomnia, central sleep apnea, sleep-related hypoventilation, and obstructive
sleep apnea hypopnea also requ ires polysomnographic studies.
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea must be diff erentiated from other causes of sleepi-
ness, such as narcolepsy, hypersomnia, and ci rcadian rhythm sleep d isorders. Obstructive
sleep apnea hypopnea can be differentiated from  narcolepsy by the absence of cataplexy,
sleep-related hallucinations, and sleep paraly sis and by the presence of loud snoring,
gasping during sleep, or observed apneas in  sleep. Daytime sleep episodes in narcolepsy
are characteristically shorter,  more refreshing, and more of ten associated with dreaming.
Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea shows characteristic apneas and hypopneas and oxy-
gen desaturation during nocturnal polysomnog raphic studies. Narcolepsy results in mul-
tiple sleep-onset rapid eye movement (REM) periods during the MS LT. Narcolepsy, like
obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, may be asso ciated with obesity, and some individuals
have concurrent narcolepsy and obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. A diagnosis of narco-
lepsy does not exclude the di agnosis of obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea, as the two con-
ditions may co-occur.
Insomnia disorder. For individuals complaining of difficulty initiating or maintaining
sleep or early-morning awakenings, insomnia disorder can be differen tiated from obstruc-
tive sleep apnea hypopnea by the absence of sn oring and the absence of the history, signs,
and symptoms characteri stic of the latter disorder. However, insomnia and obstructive
sleep apnea hypopnea may coexist, and if so , both disorders may need to be addressed
concurrently to improve sleep.
Panic attacks. Nocturnal panic attacks may include symptoms of gasping or choking
during sleep that may be difficult to distinguish clinically from obst ructive sleep apnea hy-
popnea. However, the lower frequency of episo des, intense autonomic arousal, and lack of
excessive sleepiness differentiate nocturnal pa nic attacks from obstructive sleep apnea hy-
popnea. Polysomnography in individuals with nocturnal panic attacks does not reveal the
typical pattern of apneas or oxygen desaturation characteristic of obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea. Individuals with obstructive slee p apnea hypopnea do not provide a history of
daytime panic attacks. 
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Attention-deficit/hyperact ivity disorder in chil-
dren may include symptoms of inattention, academic impairment, hyperactivity, and in-
ternalizing behaviors, all of which may also  be symptoms of chil dhood obstructive sleep
apnea hypopnea. The presence of other symptoms and signs of childhood obstructive
sleep apnea hypopnea (e.g., labored breathing or snoring during sleep and adenotonsillar
hypertrophy) would suggest the presence of obstructive sl eep apnea hypopnea. Obstruc-
tive sleep apnea hypopnea and attention-de ficit/hyperactivity disorder may commonly
co-occur, and there may be causal links between  them; therefore, risk factors such as en-
larged tonsils, obesity, or a family history of sleep apnea may help alert the clinician to
their co-occurrence.
Substance/medication-induced  insomnia or hypersomnia. Substance use and substance
withdrawal (including medications) can prod uce insomnia or hypersomnia. A careful his-
tory is usually sufficient to identify the relevant substa nce/medication, and follow-up
shows improvement of the sleep  distur bance after discontinuation of the substance/med-
ication. In other cases, the use of a substanc e/medication (e.g., alcohol, barbiturates, ben-
zodiazepines, tobacco) has been shown to exacerbate obst ructive sleep apnea hypopnea.
An individual with sy mptoms and signs cons istent with obstructive sleep apnea hypop-
Central Sleep Apnea 383
nea should receive that diagnosis, even in th e presence of concurrent substance use that is
exacerbating the condition.
Comorbidity
Systemic hypertension, coronary artery disease, heart failure, stroke, diabetes, and increased
mortality are consistently asso ciated with obstructive slee p apnea hypopnea. Risk esti-
mates vary from 30% to as much as 300% for moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea. Evidence of pulmonary hypertensi on and right heart fa ilure (e.g., cor pulmo-
nale, ankle edema, hepatic congestion) are ra re in obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and
when present indicate either very severe di sease or associated hypoventilation or cardio-
pulmonary comorbidities. Obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea also may occur with in-
creased frequency in association with a number of medical or neurological conditions (e.g.,
cerebrovascular disease, Parkinson’s disease). Physical findings refl ect the co-occurrence of
these conditions.
As many as one-third of individuals referred  for evaluation of obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea report symptoms of depression, with  as many of 10% having depression scores
consistent with moderate to severe depressi on. Severity of obstructive sleep apnea hypop-
nea, as measured by the apnea hypopnea index,  has been found to be correlated with se-
verity of symptoms of depression. This a ssociation may be stronger in males than in
females.
Relationship to Internat ional Classification of 
Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders,  2nd Edition (ICSD-2), differentiates 11 sub-
types of “sleep-related breath ing disorders,” including primary central sleep apnea, ob-
structive sleep apnea, and sle ep-related hypoventilation.
Central Sleep Apnea
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Evidence by polysomnography of five or more central apneas per hour of sleep.
B. The disorder is not better explained by another current sleep disorder.
Specify whether:
327.21 (G47.31) Idiopathic central sleep apnea:  Characterized by repeated epi-
sodes of apneas and hypopneas during sleep caused by variability in respiratory effort
but without evidence of airway obstruction.
786.04 (R06.3) Cheyne-Stokes breathing: A pattern of periodic crescendo-
decrescendo variation in tidal volume that results in central apneas and hypopneas at
a frequency of at least five events per hour, accompanied by frequent arousal.
780.57 (G47.37) Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use:  The pathogenesis
of this subtype is attributed to the effects of opioids on the respiratory rhythm genera-
tors in the medulla as well as the differential effects on hypoxic versus hypercapnic re-
spiratory drive.
Coding note  (for 780.57 [G47.37] code only): When an op ioid use disorder is present, first
code the opioid use disorder: 305.50 (F11.10) m ild opioid use disorder or 304.00 (F11.20)
moderate or severe opioid use disorder; then code 780.57 (G47.37) central sleep apnea
comorbid with opioid use. When an opioid use disorder is not present (e.g., after a one-
time heavy use of the substance), code only 780.57 (G47.37) central sleep apnea comor-
bid with opioid use.
384 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Note:  See the section “Diagnostic Features” in text.
Specify current severity:
Severity of central sleep apnea is graded according to the frequency of the breathing
disturbances as well as the extent of associated oxygen desaturation and sleep frag-
mentation that occur as a consequence of repetitive respiratory disturbances.
Subtypes
Idiopathic central sleep apnea and Cheyne-Stokes breathing are characterized by increased
gain of the ventilatory contro l system, also referred to as high loop gain,  which leads to in-
stability in ventilation and PaCO2 levels. This instability is termed periodic breathing and
can be recognized by hyperventilation alternating with hypoventilation. Individuals with
these disorders typically have pCO2 levels while awake that are slightly hypocapneic or
normocapneic. Central sleep apnea may also mani fest during initiation of treatment of ob-
structive sleep apnea hypopnea or may occur in association with obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea syndrome (termed complex sleep apnea ). The occurrence of central sleep apnea in
association with obstructive slee p apnea is also considered to be due to high loop gain. In
contrast, the pathogenesis of central sleep apnea comorbid wi th opioid use has been at-
tributed to the effects of opioids on the re spiratory rhythm generators in the medulla as
well as to its differential effects on hypoxic versus hypercapneic respiratory drive. These
individuals may have elevated pCO2 levels while awake. Individuals receiving chronic
methadone maintenance therapy have been no ted to have increased somnolence and de-
pression, although the ro le of breathing disorders associated with opioid medication in caus-
ing these problems has not been studied. 
Specifiers
An increase in the central apnea index (i.e., number of central apneas per hour of sleep) re-
flects an increase in severity of central sleep apnea. Sleep continuity and quality may be
markedly impaired with reductions in restor ative stages of non–rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep (i.e., decreased slow-wav e sleep [stage N3]). In indi viduals with severe Cheyne-
Stokes breathing, the pattern can also be ob served during resting wakefulness, a finding
that is thought to be a poor prognostic marker for mortality. 
Diagnostic Features
Central sleep apnea disorders ar e characterized by repeated episodes of apneas and hy-
popneas during sleep caused by variability in respiratory effort. These are disorders of
ventilatory control in which resp iratory events occur in a peri odic or intermittent pattern.
Idiopathic central sleep apnea  is characterized by sleepiness, insomnia, and awakenings due
to dyspnea in association with five or more  central apneas per hour of sleep. Central sleep
apnea occurring in individuals with heart failu re, stroke, or renal failure typically have a
breathing pattern called Cheyne-Stok es breathing,  which is characterized by a pattern of
periodic crescendo-decrescendo variation in tidal volume that results in central apneas
and hypopneas occurring at a frequency of at least five events per hour that are accompa-
nied by frequent arousals. Central and obstru ctive sleep apneas may coexist; the ratio of
central to obstructive apneas/hypopneas may be  used to identify which condition is pre-
dominant.
Alterations in neuromuscular control of br eathing can occur in association with med-
ications or substances used in individuals with mental health conditions, which can cause
or exacerbate impairme nts of respiratory rhythm and ventilation. Individuals taking these
medications have a sleep-related breathing diso rder that could contribute to sleep distur-
bances and symptoms such as sleepiness, confusion, and depression. Specifically, chronic
Central Sleep Apnea 385
use of long-acting opioid medications  is often associated with im pairment of respiratory con-
trol leading to central sleep apnea.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with central sleep apnea hypopneas can manifest with sleepiness or insomnia.
There can be complaints of sleep fragment ation, including awakening with dyspnea.
Some individuals are asymptomatic. Obstruct ive sleep apnea hypopnea can coexist with
Cheyne-Stokes breathing, and thus snoring and abruptly terminating apneas may be ob-
served during sleep. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of idiopathic central sleep apnea is unknown but thought to be rare. The
prevalence of Cheyne-Stokes breathing is high in individuals with depressed cardiac ven-
tricular ejection fraction. In individuals with an ejection fraction of less than 45%, the prev-
alence has been reported to be 20% or high er. The male-to-female ratio for prevalence is
even more highly skewed toward males than for obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea. Prev-
alence increases with age, and most patients are older than 60 years. Cheyne-Stokes breath-
ing occurs in approximately 20% of individu als with acute stroke. Central sleep apnea
comorbid with opioid use occurs in approxim ately 30% of individuals taking chronic opi-
oids for nonmalignant pain and similarly in individuals receiving methadone mainte-
nance therapy. 
Development and Course
The onset of Cheyne-Stokes breathing appears tied to the deve lopment of heart failure. The
Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern is associated with oscillations in heart rate, blood pres-
sure and oxygen desaturation, and elevated sy mpathetic nervous system activity that can
promote progression of heart failure. The clinic al significance of Cheyne-Stokes breathing
in the setting of stroke is no t known, but Cheyne-Stokes breathing may be a transient find-
ing that resolves with time after acute stro ke. Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid
use has been documented with chro nic use (i.e., several months). 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Cheyne-Stokes breathing is freq uently present in individu-
als with heart failure. The coexistence of atrial fibrillation further increases risk, as do older
age and male gender. Cheyne-Stokes breathing is also seen in association with acute stroke
and possibly renal failure. The underlying ventila tory instability in the setting of heart fail-
ure has been attributed to increased ventilatory chemos ensitivity and hyperventilation
due to pulmonary vascular congestion and ci rculatory delay. Central sleep apnea is seen
in individuals taking long-acting opioids.
Diagnostic Markers
Physical findings seen in individuals with a Cheyne-Stokes breathing pattern relate to its
risk factors. Findings consiste nt with heart failure, such as jugular venous distension, S3
heart sound, lung crackles, and lower extremity edema, may be present. Polysomnogra-
phy is used to characterize the breathing characteristics of  each breathing-related sleep
disorder subtype. Central sl eep apneas are recorded when periods of breathing cessation
for longer than 10 seconds occur. Cheyne-Sto kes breathing is characterized by a pattern of
periodic crescendo-decrescend o variation in tidal volume that results in central apneas
and hypopneas occurring at a frequency of at least five events per hour that are accompa-
nied by frequent arousals. The cycle length of Cheyne-Stokes breathing (or time from end
of one central apnea to the end of the next apnea) is about 60 seconds.
386 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Functional Consequences of Central Sleep Apnea
Idiopathic central sleep apnea has been report ed to cause symptoms of disrupted sleep, in-
cluding insomnia and sleepines s. Cheyne-Stokes breathing with comorbid heart failure
has been associated with excessive sleepine ss, fatigue, and insomnia, although many in-
dividuals may be asymptomatic. Coexistence of heart failure and Cheyne-Stokes breath-
ing may be associated with increased card iac arrhythmias and increased mortality or
cardiac transplantation. Individuals with central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid use
may present with symptoms of sleepiness or insomnia.
Differential Diagnosis
Idiopathic central sleep apnea must be distinguished from other breathing-related sleep
disorders, other sleep disorders, and medical conditions and mental disorders that cause
sleep fragmentation, sleepiness, and fatigue.  This is achieved using polysomnography.
Other breathing-related sleep disorders and sleep disorders. Central sleep apnea can
be distinguished from obstructive sleep apne a hypopnea by the presen ce of at least five
central apneas per hour of sleep. These condit ions may co-occur, but central sleep apnea is
considered to predominate when the ratio of central to obstructive respiratory events ex-
ceeds 50%.
Cheyne-Stokes breathing can be distinguishe d from other mental disorders, including
other sleep disorders, and othe r medical conditions that caus e sleep fragmentation, sleep-
iness, and fatigue based on the presence of a predisposing condition (e.g., heart failure or
stroke) and signs and polysomnographic evidence  of the characteristic breathing pattern.
Polysomnographic respiratory findings can help distinguish Cheyne-Stokes breathing
from insomnia due to other medical conditio ns. High-altitude periodic breathing has a
pattern that resembles Cheyne-Stokes breathin g but has a shorter cycle time, occurs only
at high altitude, and is not associated with heart failure. 
Central sleep apnea comorbid with opioid us e can be differentiated from other types of
breathing-related sleep disorders based on the use of long-acting opioid medications in
conjunction with polysomnographic evidence of central apneas and periodic or ataxic
breathing. It can be distinguished from inso mnia due to drug or substance use based on
polysomnographic evidence of central sleep apnea.
Comorbidity
Central sleep apnea disorders are frequently pr esent in users of long-acting opioids, such
as methadone. Individuals taking these medi cations have a sleep-related breathing disor-
der that could contribute to sleep disturbances and symptoms  such as sleepiness, confu-
sion, and depression. While the individual is  asleep, breathing patterns such as central
apneas, periodic apneas, and ataxic breathing may be observed. Obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea may coexist with central sleep apnea,  and features consiste nt with this condi-
tion can also be present (see “Obstructive Sleep Apnea Hypopnea” earlier in this chapter).
Cheyne-Stokes breathing is more commonly obse rved in association with conditions that
include heart failure, stroke, and renal failure and is seen more frequently in individuals
with atrial fibrillation. Individuals with Ch eyne-Stokes breathing are more likely to be
older, to be male, and to have  lower weight than individual s with obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea.
Sleep-Related Hypoventilation 387
Sleep-Related Hypoventilation
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Polysomnograpy demonstrates episodes of decreased respiration associated with el-
evated CO2 levels. ( Note:  In the absence of objective measurement of CO2, persistent
low levels of hemoglobin oxygen saturation unassociated with apneic/hypopneic
events may indicate hypoventilation.)
B. The disturbance is not better explained by another current sleep disorder.
Specify whether:
327.24 (G47.34) Idiopathic hypoventilation:  This subtype is not attributable to any
readily identified condition.
327.25 (G47.35) Congenital centr al alveolar hypoventilation:  This subtype is a rare
congenital disorder in which the individual typically presents in the perinatal period with
shallow breathing, or cyanosis and apnea during sleep.
327.26 (G47.36) Comorbid sleep -related hypoventilation: This subtype occurs as a
consequence of a medical condition, such as a pulmonary disorder (e.g., interstitial
lung disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) or a neuromuscular or chest wall
disorder (e.g., muscular dystrophies, postpolio syndrome, cervical spinal cord injury,
kyphoscoliosis), or medications (e.g., benzodiazepines, opiates). It also occurs with
obesity (obesity hypoventilation disorder), where it reflects a combination of increased
work of breathing due to reduced chest wall compliance and ventilation-perfusion mis-
match and variably reduced ventilatory drive. Such individuals usually are character-
ized by body mass index of greater than 30 and hypercapnia during wakefulness (with
a pCO2 of greater than 45), without other evidence of hypoventilation.  
Specify current severity:
Severity is graded according to the degree of hypoxemia and hypercarbia present dur-
ing sleep and evidence of end organ impairment due to these abnormalities (e.g., right-
sided heart failure). The presence of blood gas  abnormalities during wakefulness is an
indicator of greater severity.
Subtypes
Regarding obesity hypoventilati on disorder, the prevalence of obesity hypoventilation in
the general population is not known but is thought to be increasing in association with the
increased prevalence of obesity and extreme obesity.
Diagnostic Features
Sleep-related hypoventilation can occur in dependently or, more frequently, comorbid
with medical or neurological disorders, medi cation use, or substa nce use disorder. Al-
though symptoms are not mandatory to make this diagnosis, individuals often report
excessive daytime sleepiness, frequent arou sals and awakenings during sleep, morning
headaches, and insomnia complaints. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with sleep-related hypoventilation  can present with sl eep-related complaints
of insomnia or sleepiness. Episodes of orth opnea can occur in individuals with diaphragm
weakness. Headaches upon awakening may be pr esent. During sleep, episodes of shallow
breathing may be observed, an d obstructive sleep apnea hypo pnea or central sleep apnea
may coexist. Consequences of ventilatory in sufficiency, includin g pulmonary hyperten-
sion, cor pulmonale (right heart failure), polycythemia, and neurocognitive dysfunction,
388 Sleep-Wake Disorders
can be present. With progression of ventilato ry insufficiency, bloo d gas abnormalities ex-
tend into wakefulness. Features of the me dical condition causing sleep-related hypoven-
tilation can also be present. Episodes of hy poventilation may be as sociated with frequent
arousals or bradytachycardia. Individuals ma y complain of excessive sleepiness and in-
somnia or morning headaches or may present wi th findings of neuroc ognitive dysfunction
or depression. Hypoventilation may not be present during wakefulness.
Prevalence
Idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation in adults is very uncommon. The prevalence of
congenital central alveolar hy poventilation is unknown, but the disorder is rare. Comor-
bid sleep-related hypoventilation (i.e., hypo ventilation comorbid with other conditions,
such as chronic obstructive pulmonary diseas e [COPD], neuromuscular disorders, or obe-
sity) is more common.
Development and Course
Idiopathic sleep-related hypove ntilation is thought to be a slowly progressive disorder of
respiratory impairment. When th is disorder occurs comorbidly  with other disorders (e.g.,
COPD, neuromuscular disorders, obesity), diseas e severity reflects the severity of the un-
derlying condition, and the disorder progre sses as the condition worsens. Complications
such as pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmon ale, cardiac dysrhythmias, polycythemia,
neurocognitive dysfunction, and worsening re spiratory failure can develop with increas-
ing severity of blood gas abnormalities. 
Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation  usually manifests at birth with shallow,
erratic, or absent breathing. This disorder can also manifest during infancy, childhood,
and adulthood because of va riable penetrance of the PHOX2B  mutation. Children with
congenital central alveolar hypo ventilation are more likely to have disorders of the auto-
nomic nervous system, Hirschsprung’s disease, neural crest tumors, and characteristic box-
shaped face (i.e., the face is short relative to its width).
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Ventilatory drive can be reduced in  individuals using central nervous
system depressants, including benzod iazepines, opiates, and alcohol. 
Genetic and physiological. Idiopathic sleep-related hypoventilation is associated with
reduced ventilatory drive due to a blunted chemoresponsiveness to CO2 (reduced respi-
ratory drive; i.e., “won’t brea the”), reflecting underlying neurological deficits in centers
governing the control of ventilation. More co mmonly, sleep-related hypoventilation is co-
morbid with another medical condition, su ch as a pulmonary diso rder, a neuromuscular
or chest wall disorder, or hypothyroidism, or with use of medications (e.g., benzodiaze-
pines, opiates). In these conditions, the hy poventilation may be a consequence of in-
creased work of breathing and/or impairment of respiratory muscle function (i.e., “can’t
breathe”) or reduced respiratory drive (i.e., “won’t breathe”).
Neuromuscular disorders influence breathin g through impairment of respiratory mo-
tor innervation or respiratory muscle function. They include conditions such as amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis, spinal cord injury , diaphragmatic paralysis, myasthenia gravis,
Lambert-Eaton syndrome, toxic or metabolic myopathies, postpolio syndrome, and Char-
cot-Marie-Tooth syndrome. 
Congenital central alveolar hypoventilation is a genetic disorder at tributable to muta-
tions of PHOX2B,  a gene that is crucial for the de velopment of the embryonic autonomic
nervous system and neural crest derivatives. Children with congenital central alveolar hy-
poventilation show blunted vent ilatory responses to hypercapnia, especially in non–rapid
eye movement sleep.
Sleep-Related Hypoventilation 389
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Gender distributions for sleep-related hypove ntilation occurring in association with co-
morbid conditions reflect the gender distributions of the co morbid conditions. For exam-
ple, COPD is more frequently present in males and with increasing age. 
Diagnostic Markers 
Sleep-related hypoventilation is diagnosed using polysomnography showing sleep-related
hypoxemia and hypercapnia that is not better explained by another breathing-related sleep
disorder. The documentation of increased arterial pCO2 levels to greater than 55 mmHg
during sleep or a 10 mmHg or greater increase in pCO2 levels (to a level that also exceeds
50 mmHg) during sleep in comparison to awake supine values, for 10 minutes or longer, is
the gold standard for diagnosis. However, obtaining arterial blood gas determinations dur-
ing sleep is impractical, and non-invasive measures of pCO2 have not been adequately val-
idated during sleep and are not widely used during polysomnography in adults. Prolonged
and sustained decreases in oxyg en saturation (oxygen saturation of less than 90% for more
than 5 minutes with a nadir of at least 85%, or oxygen saturation of less than 90% for at least
30% of sleep time) in the absence of evidence of upper airway obstruction are often used as
an indication of sleep- related hypoventilation; however, this  finding is not sp ecific, as there
are other potential causes of hypoxemia,  such as that due to lung disease.
Functional Consequences of 
Sleep-Related Hypoventilation
The consequences of sleep-related hypoventilati on are related to the effects of chronic ex-
posure to hypercapnia and hypoxemia. Th ese blood gas derangements cause vasocon-
striction of the pulmonary va sculature leading to pulmon ary hypertension, which, if
severe, can result in right-sided heart failure  (cor pulmonale). Hypo xemia can lead to dys-
function of organs such as the brain, blood,  and heart, leading to outcomes such as cog-
nitive dysfunction, polycythemia, and cardiac arrhythmias. Hypercapnia can depress
ventilatory drive, leading to pr ogressive respiratory failure. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions affecting ventilation. In adults, the idiopathic variety of sleep-
related hypoventilation is very uncommon and is determined by excluding the presence of
lung diseases, skeletal malformations, neuromuscular disorders, and other medical and
neurological disorders or medications that affect ventilation. Sleep-related hypoventila-
tion must be distinguished from other causes of sleep-related hypoxemia, such as that due
to lung disease.
Other breathing-related sleep disorders. Sleep-related hypoventilation can be distin-
guished from obstructive sleep  apnea hypopnea and central sleep apnea based on clinical
features and findings on polysomnography. Sl eep-related hypoventilation typically shows
more sustained periods of oxygen desaturation rather that  the periodic episodes seen in
obstructive sleep apnea hypopnea and central sleep apnea. Obstructive sleep apnea hy-
popnea and central sleep apnea also show a pa ttern of discrete epis odes of re peated air-
flow decreases that can be absent in sleep-related hypoventilation.
Comorbidity 
Sleep-related hypoventilation often occurs in a ssociation with a pulmonary disorder (e.g., in-
terstitial lung disease, COPD), with a neurom uscular or chest wall disorder (e.g., muscular
dystrophies, post-polio syndrome, cervical spinal cord in jury, obesity, kyphoscoliosis), or,
390 Sleep-Wake Disorders
most relevant to the mental he alth provider, with medication use (e.g., benzodiazepines, opi-
ates). Congenital central alveol ar hypoventilation often occurs in association with autonomic
dysfunction and may occur in association with Hirschsprung’s disease. COPD, a disorder of
lower airway obstruction usually associated with cigarette sm oking, can result in sleep-
related hypoventilation and hypoxemia. The pres ence of coexisting obstructive sleep apnea
hypopnea is thought to exacerbate hypoxemia and hypercapnia during sleep and wakeful-
ness. The relationship between congenital central alveolar hypoventilation and idiopathic
sleep-related hypoventilation is unclear; in some individuals, idiopathic sleep-related hy-
poventilation may represent cases of late-onset  congenital central alveolar hypoventilation.
Relationship to Internat ional Classification of 
Sleep Disorders
The International Classificat ion of Sleep Disorders,  2nd Edition (ICSD-2), combines sleep-
related hypoventilation and sleep-related hypo xemia under the category of sleep-related
hypoventilation/hypoxemic syndromes. This ap proach to classificati on reflects the fre-
quent co-occurrence of disorder s that lead to hypoventilation  and hypoxemia. In contrast,
the classification used in DS M-5 reflects evidence that th ere are distinct sleep-related
pathogenetic processes le ading to hypoventilation.
Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A persistent or recurrent pattern of sleep disruption that is primarily due to an alteration
of the circadian system or to a misalignment between the endogenous circadian
rhythm and the sleep–wake schedule required by an individual’s physical environment
or social or professional schedule. 
B. The sleep disruption leads to excessive sleepiness or insomnia, or both.
C. The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, oc-
cupational, and other important areas of functioning.
Coding note:  For ICD-9-CM, code 307.45 for all subtypes. For ICD-10-CM, code is based
on subtype.
Specify whether:
307.45 (G47.21) Delayed sleep phase type:  A pattern of delayed sleep onset and
awakening times, with an inability to fall asleep and awaken at a desired or convention-
ally acceptable earlier time.
Specify if:
Familial:  A family history of delayed sleep phase is present.
Specify if:
Overlapping with non-24-hour sleep-wake type:  Delayed sleep phase type
may overlap with another circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder, non-24-hour
sleep-wake type. 
307.45 (G47.22) Advanced sleep phase type:  A pattern of advanced sleep onset and
awakening times, with an inability to remain awake or asleep until the desired or con-
ventionally acceptable later sleep or wake times.
Specify if:
Familial:  A family history of advanced sleep phase is present. 
307.45 (G47.23) Irregular sleep-wake type:  A temporally disorganized sleep-wake
pattern, such that the timing of sleep and wake periods is variable throughout the 24-
hour period.
Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders 391
307.45 (G47.24) Non-24-hour sleep-wake type:  A pattern of sleep-wake cycles that
is not synchronized to the 24-hour environment, with a consistent daily drift (usually to
later and later times) of sleep onset and wake times.
307.45 (G47.26) Shift work type:  Insomnia during the major sleep period and/or ex-
cessive sleepiness (including inadvertent sleep) during the major awake period asso-
ciated with a shift work schedule (i.e., requiring unconventional work hours).
307.45 (G47.20) Unspecified type
Specify if:
Episodic:  Symptoms last at least 1 month but less than 3 months.
Persistent:  Symptoms last 3 months or longer.
Recurrent: Two or more episodes occur within the space of 1 year.
Delayed Sleep Phase Type
Diagnostic Features
The delayed sleep phase type is based primarily on a history of a delay in the timing of the
major sleep period (usually more than 2 hours)  in relation to the desired sleep and wake-
up time, resulting in symptoms of insomnia and excessive sleepiness. When allowed to set
their own schedule, individuals with delayed sleep phase type exhibit normal sleep qual-
ity and duration for age. Symptoms of slee p-onset insomnia, diffic ulty waking in the
morning, and excessive early day sleepiness are prominent.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Common associated features of delayed sleep phase type include a hi story of mental dis-
orders or a concurrent mental disorder. Ex treme and prolonged difficulty awakening with
morning confusion is also common. Psychophy siological insomnia may develop as a re-
sult of maladaptive behaviors that impair sleep and increase arousal because of repeated
attempts to fall asleep at an earlier time.
Prevalence
Prevalence of delayed sleep phase type in the general population is approximately 0.17%
but appears to be greater than 7% in adolescents. Although the prevalence of familial de-
layed sleep phase type has not been established , a family history of delayed sleep phase is
present in individuals with delayed sleep phase type. 
Development and Course
Course is persistent, lasting longer than 3 mo nths, with intermittent  exacerbations through-
out adulthood. Although age at onset is variable, symptoms begin typically in adolescence
and early adulthood and persist for several mo nths to years before diagnosis is estab-
lished. Severity may decrease with ag e. Relapse of symptoms is common.
Clinical expression may vary across the lif espan depending on social, school, and work
obligations. Exacerbation is usua lly triggered by a change in work or school schedule that
requires an early rise time. Individuals wh o can alter their work schedules to accommo-
date the delayed circadian sleep and wake timing can experience remission of symptoms. 
Increased prevalence in adolescence may be a consequence of both physiological and be-
havioral factors. Hormonal changes may be involved specifically, as delayed sleep phase is as-
sociated with the onset of puberty. Thus, de layed sleep phase type in adolescents should be
differentiated from the common delay in the timi ng of circadian rhythms in this age group. In
the familial form, the course is persistent and may not improve significantly with age.
392 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. Predisposing factors may include a longer than average cir-
cadian period, changes in light sensitivity, an d impaired homeostatic sleep drive. Some in-
dividuals with delayed sleep phase type may be hypersensi tive to evening light, which
can serve as a delay signal to the circadian cloc k, or they may be hy posensitive to morning
light such that its phase-advancing effects ar e reduced. Genetic factors may play a role in
the pathogenesis of familial and sporadic forms of delayed sleep phase type, including
mutations in circadian genes (e.g., PER3 , CKIe ).
Diagnostic Markers
Confirmation of the diagnosis includes a complete history and use of a sleep diary or actigra-
phy (i.e., a wrist-worn motion detector that mo nitors motor activity for prolonged periods and
can be used as a proxy for sleep-wake patterns for at least 7 days). Th e period covered should
include weekends, when social an d occupational obligations are le ss strict, to ensure that the
individual exhibits a consistently delayed slee p-wake pattern. Biomarkers such as salivary
dim light melatonin onset should be obtain ed only when the diagnosis is unclear.
Functional Consequences of  Delayed Sleep Phase Type
Excessive early day sleepiness is prominent. Ex treme and prolonged difficulty awakening
with morning confusion (i.e., sleep inertia) is also common. The severity of insomnia and
excessive sleepiness symptoms varies substa ntially among individuals and largely de-
pends on the occupational and social demands on the individual. 
Differential Diagnosis
Normative variations in sleep. Delayed sleep phase type must be distinguished from
“normal” sleep patterns in which an individual has a late schedule that does not cause
personal, social, or occupational distress (m ost commonly seen in adolescents and young
adults).
Other sleep disorders. Insomnia disorder and other circadian rhythm sleep-wake dis-
orders should be included in the differenti al. Excessive sleepiness may also be caused by
other sleep disturbances, such as breathing- related sleep disorders, insomnias, sleep-
related movement disorders, and medical, ne urological, and mental disorders. Overnight
polysomnography may help in evaluating for other comorbid sleep disorders, such as
sleep apnea. The circadian nature of delaye d sleep phase type, howe ver, should differen-
tiate it from other disorders with similar complaints.
Comorbidity
Delayed sleep phase type is strongly associated  with depression, personality disorder, and
somatic symptom disorder or illness anxiety d isorder. In addition, comorbid sleep disor-
ders, such as insomnia disorder, restless legs syndrome, and sleep apnea, as well as depres-
sive and bipolar disorders and anxiety disord ers, can exacerbate symptoms of insomnia
and excessive sleepiness. Delayed sleep phase  type may overlap with another circadian
rhythm sleep-wake diso rder, non-24-ho ur sleep-wake type. Sighted individuals with non-
24-hour sleep-wake type disorder commonly also have a history of delayed circadian sleep
phase. 
Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders 393
Advanced Sleep Phase Type
Specifiers 
Advanced sleep phase type may be document ed with the specified “familial.” Although
the prevalence of familial adva nced sleep phase type has no t been established, a family
history of advanced sleep phase is present in individuals with advanced sleep phase type.
In this type, specific mutations demonstrate an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance.
In the familial form, onset of symptoms ma y occur earlier (during childhood and early
adulthood), the course is persistent, and the se verity of symptoms may increase with age.
Diagnostic Features
Advanced sleep phase type is characterized by sleep-wake times that are several hours
earlier than desired or conventional times. Di agnosis is based primarily on a history of an
advance in the timing of the major sleep period  (usually more than 2 hours) in relation to
the desired sleep and wake-up time, with sy mptoms of early morning insomnia and ex-
cessive daytime sleepiness. When allowed to  set their schedule, individuals with ad-
vanced sleep phase type will exhibit norm al sleep quality and duration for age. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with advanced sleep phase type are “morning types,” having earlier sleep-
wake times, with the timing of circadian biom arkers such as melatonin and core body tem-
perature rhythms occurring 2–4 hours earlier th an normal. When required to keep a con-
ventional schedule requiring a delay of bedtim e, these individuals will continue to have an
early rise time, leading to persistent sleep de privation and daytime sleepiness. Use of hyp-
notics or alcohol to combat sleep-maintenance insomnia and stimulants to reduce daytime
sleepiness may lead to substance abuse in these individuals. 
Prevalence
The estimated prevalence of advanced sleep phase type is approximately 1% in middle-
age adults. Sleep-wake times and circadian pha se advance in older individuals, probably
accounting for increased prevalence in this population.
Development and Course
Onset is usually in late adulthood. In the familial  form, onset can be earlier. The course is typ-
ically persistent, lasting more than 3 months, but the severity may increase depending on work
and social schedules. The advanced sleep pha se type is more common in older adults. 
Clinical expression may vary across the lif espan depending on social, school, and work
obligations. Individuals who can alter their work schedules to ac commodate the advanced
circadian sleep and wake timing can experience remission of symptoms. Increasing age
tends to advance the sleep phase, however, it is unclear whether the common age-associ-
ated advanced sleep phase type is due solely to a change in circadian timing (as seen in the
familial form) or also to age-related changes in the homeostatic regulation of sleep, result-
ing in earlier awakening. Severi ty, remission, and relapse of symptoms suggest lack of ad-
herence to behavioral and environmental trea tments designed to control sleep and wake
structure and lig ht exposure.
394 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Decreased late afternoon/early evening exposure to light and/or expo-
sure to early morning light du e to early morning awakening can increase the risk of ad-
vanced sleep phase type by advancing circadian rhythms. By going to bed early, these
individuals are not exposed to light in the phase delay region of the curve, resulting in per-
petuation of advanced phase. In familial adva nced sleep phase type, a shortening of the
endogenous circadian period can result in an advanced sleep phase, although circadian pe-
riod does not appear to system atically decrease with age. 
Genetic and physiological. Advanced sleep phase type ha s demonstrated an autoso-
mal dominant mode of inheritance, including a PER2  gene mutation causing hypophos-
phorylation of the PER2 protein and a missense mutation in CKI.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
African Americans may have a shorter circad ian period and larger magnitude phase ad-
vances to light than do Caucasians, possibly increasing the risk for development of ad-
vanced sleep phase type in this population.
Diagnostic Markers
A sleep diary and actigraphy may be used as diagnostic markers, as described earlier for
delayed sleep phase type. 
Functional Consequences of  Advanced Sleep Phase Type
Excessive sleepiness associated with advanced  sleep phase can have a negative effect on
cognitive performance, social interaction, and safety. Use of wake-promoting agents to
combat sleepiness or sedatives for early mo rning awakening may increase potential for
substance abuse.
Differential Diagnosis
Other sleep disorders. Behavioral factors such as irre gular sleep schedules, voluntary
early awakening, and exposure to light in th e early morning should be considered, partic-
ularly in older adults . Careful attention should be paid to rule out other sleep-wake dis-
orders, such as insomnia disorder, and other mental disorders and medical conditions that
can cause early morning awakening. 
Depressive and bipolar disorders. Because early morning awaken ing, fatigue, and sleep-
iness are prominent features of major depres sive disorder, depressive and bipolar disor-
ders must also be considered. 
Comorbidity
Medical conditions and mental disorders wi th the symptom of early morning awakening,
such as insomnia, can co-occur with the advance sleep phase type. 
Irregular Sleep-Wake Type
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of irregular sleep-wake type is based primarily on a history of symptoms of
insomnia at night (during the usual sleep pe riod) and excessive sleepiness (napping) dur-
ing the day. Irregular sleep-wake type is char acterized by a lack of discernable sleep-wake
Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders 395
circadian rhythm. There is no major sleep period, and sleep is fragmented into at least
three periods during the 24-hour day. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with irregular slee p-wake type typically present with insomnia or excessive
sleepiness, depending on the time of day. Sleep and wake periods across 24 hours are frag-
mented, although the longest sleep period tends to occur between 2:00 A.M. and 6:00 A.M.
and is usually less than 4 hours. A history of isolation or reclusion may occur in association
with the disorder and contribute to the symptoms  via a lack of external stimuli to help en-
train a normal pattern. Individuals or their ca regivers report frequent  naps throughout the
day. Irregular sleep-wake type is most comm only associated with neurodegenerative dis-
orders, such as major neurocognitive disorder, and many neurodevelopmental disorders
in children. 
Prevalence
Prevalence of irregular sleep-wake type in the general population is unknown. 
Development and Course
The course of irregular sleep-wak e type is persistent. Age at onset is variable, but the dis-
order is more common in older adults. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Neurodegenerative disorders, such as  Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s
disease, and Huntington’s disease, and neur odevelopmental disorders in children in-
crease the risk for irregular sleep-wake type. 
Environmental. Decreased exposure to environmenta l light and structured daytime ac-
tivity can be associated with a low-amplitud e circadian rhythm. Hospitalized individuals
are especially prone to such weak external en training stimuli, and even outside the hospi-
tal setting, individuals with major neurocogni tive disorder (i.e., dementia) are exposed to
significantly less bright light. 
Diagnostic Markers
A detailed sleep history and a sleep diary (by a caregiver) or actigraphy help confirm the
irregular sleep-wake pattern.
Functional Consequences of 
Irregular Sleep-Wake Type
Lack of a clearly discernible major sleep and wake period in irregular sleep-wake type re-
sults in insomnia or excessive sleepiness, depending on the time of day. Disruption of the
caregiver’s sleep also often occurs and is an important consideration.
Differential Diagnosis
Normative variations in sleep. Irregular sleep-wake type sh ould be distinguished from
a voluntary irregular sleep-wake schedule and po or sleep hygiene, which can result in in-
somnia and excessive sleepiness. 
Other medical conditions and mental disorders. Other causes of insomnia and daytime
sleepiness, including comorbid medical condit ions and mental disorders or medication,
should be considered. 
396 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Comorbidity
Irregular sleep-wake type is often comorbid  with neurodegenerat ive and neurodevelop-
mental disorders, such as major neurocognitive disorder, inte llectual disability (intellec-
tual developmental disorder), and traumatic br ain injury. It is also  comorbid with other
medical conditions and mental disorders in wh ich there is social isolation and/or lack of
light and structured activities. 
Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Type
Diagnostic Features
The diagnosis of non-24-hour sleep-wake type  is based primarily on a history of symp-
toms of insomnia or excessive sleepiness related to abnormal synchronization between the
24-hour light-dark cycle and the endogenous circadian rhythm. Individuals typically pre-
sent with periods of insomnia, excessive sleepiness, or both, which alternate with short
asymptomatic periods. Starting with the asymptomatic period, when the individual’s
sleep phase is aligned to the external envi ronment, sleep latency will gradually increase
and the individual will complain of sleep-onset insomnia. As the sleep phase continues to
drift so that sleep time is no w in the daytime, the individu al will have trouble staying
awake during the day and will complain of sleepiness. Because the circadian period is not
aligned to the external 24-hour environment,  symptoms will depend on when an individ-
ual tries to sleep in relation to the circadian rhythm of sleep propensity. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Non-24-hour sleep-wake type is most common among blind or visually impaired individ-
uals who have decreased light perception. In si ghted individuals, there is often a history of
delayed sleep phase and of decreased exposure to light and structured social and physical
activity. Sighted individuals with non-24-h our sleep-wake type also demonstrate in-
creased sleep duration.
Prevalence
Prevalence of non-24-hour sleep-wake type in the general population is unclear, but the
disorder appears rare in sighte d individuals. The prevalence in blind individuals is esti-
mated to be 50%.
Development and Course
Course of non-24-hour sleep-wake type is per sistent, with intermittent remission and ex-
acerbations due to changes in work and social schedules throughout the lifespan. Age at
onset is variable, depending on the onset of visual impairment. In sighted individuals, be-
cause of the overlap with delayed sleep phase  type, non-24-hour sleep-wake type may de-
velop in adolescence or early adulthood. Remi ssion and relapse of symptoms in blind and
sighted individuals largely depend on adhere nce to treatments designed to control sleep
and wake structure and light exposure.
Clinical expression may vary across the lif espan depending on social, school, and work
obligations. In adolescents and adults, irre gular sleep-wake schedules and exposure to
light or lack of light at critical times of the day can exacerbate the effects of sleep loss and
disrupt circadian entrainment. Consequently , symptoms of insomnia, daytime sleepiness,
and school, professional, and interpersonal functioning may worsen.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. In sighted individuals, decreased expo sure or sensitivit y to light and so-
cial and physical activity cues may contribute to a free-running circadian rhythm. With the
Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders 397
high frequency of mental disorders involving social isol ation and cases of non-24-hour
sleep-wake type developing after a change in sl eep habits (e.g., night shift work, job loss),
behavioral factors in combination with physi ological tendency may precipitate and per-
petuate this disorder in sighte d individuals. Hospitalized indi viduals with neurological and
psychiatric disorders can become insensitive to  social cues, predisposing them to the de-
velopment of non-24-hour sleep-wake type.
Genetic and physiological. Blindness is a risk factor for non-24-hour sleep-wake type.
Non-24-hour sleep-wake type has been as sociated with traumatic brain injury.
Diagnostic Markers
Diagnosis is confirmed by history and sleep di ary or actigraphy for an extended period.
Sequential measurement of phase markers (e.g ., melatonin) can help determine circadian
phase in both sighted and blind individuals.
Functional Consequences of 
Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Type
Complaints of insomnia (sleep onset and sleep  maintenance), excessive sleepiness, or both
are prominent. The unpredictability of sleep an d wake times (typically a daily delay drift)
results in an inability to attend  school or maintain a steady job and may increase potential
for social isolation. 
Differential Diagnosis
Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders. In sighted individuals, non-24-hour sleep-wake
type should be differentiated from delayed sl eep phase type, as individuals with delayed
sleep phase type may display a similar progressive delay in sleep period for several days. 
Depressive disorders. Depressive symptoms and depressive disorders may result in
similar circadian dysregulation and symptoms. 
Comorbidity
Blindness is often comorbid with non-24-hour sleep-wake type, as are depressive and bi-
polar disorders with social isolation.
Shift Work Type
Diagnostic Features
Diagnosis is primarily based on a history of th e individual working outside of the normal
8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. daytime window (particularly at ni ght) on a regularly scheduled (i.e.,
non-overtime) basis. Symptoms of excessive sleepiness at work, and impaired sleep at
home, on a persistent basis are prominent. Pres ence of both sets of symptoms are usually
required for a diagnosis of shift work type. Ty pically, when the individual reverts to a day-
work routine, symptoms resolve. Although the etiology is slightly different, individuals
who travel across many time zones on a very frequent basis may experience effects similar
to those experienced by individuals with shift work type who work rotating shifts. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of shift work ty pe is unclear, but the disorder is estimated to affect 5%–10%
of the night worker population  (16%–20% of the workforce). Prevalence rises with advance-
ment into middle-age and beyond (Drake et al. 2004).
398 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Development and Course
Shift work type can appear in individuals of any age but is more prevalent in individuals
older than 50 years and typically worsens with the passage of time if the disruptive work
hours persist. Although older adults may sh ow similar rates of circadian phase adjust-
ment to a change in routine as  do younger adults, they appear to experience significantly
more sleep disruption as a consequence of the circadian phase shift.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Predisposing factors include a morn ing-type disposition, a need for
long (i.e., more than 8 hours) sleep duration s in order to feel well rested, and strong com-
peting social and domestic needs (e.g., parents of young children). Individuals who are able
to commit to a nocturnal lifestyle, with fe w competing day-oriented demands, appear at
lower risk for shift work type. 
Genetic and physiological. Because shift workers are more likely than day workers to
be obese, obstructive sleep apnea may be present and may exacerbate the symptoms.
Diagnostic Markers
A history and sleep diary or actigraphy may be  useful in diagnosis, as discussed earlier for
delayed sleep phase type. 
Functional Consequences  of Shift Work Type 
Individuals with shift work type not only ma y perform poorly at work but also appear to
be at risk for accidents both at work and on the drive home. They may also be at risk for
poor mental health (e.g., alcohol use diso rder, substance use diso rder, depression) and
physical health (e.g., gastrointestinal disorder s, cardiovascular dise ase, diabetes, cancer).
Individuals with a history of bipolar disorder  are particularly vulnerable to shift work
type–related episodes of mania resulting from missed nights of sleep. Shift work type of-
ten results in interpersonal problems. 
Differential Diagnosis
Normative variations in sleep with shift work. The diagnosis of shift work type, as op-
posed to the “normal” difficulties of shift wo rk, must depend to some  extent on the sever-
ity of symptoms and/or level of distress experienced by the individual. Presence of shift
work type symptoms even when the individual is able to live on a da y-oriented routine for
several weeks at a time may suggest the presence  of other sleep disord ers, such as sleep ap-
nea, insomnia, and narcolepsy, which should be ruled out. 
Comorbidity
Shift work type has been associated with in creased alcohol use disorder, other substance
use disorders, and depression. A variety of physical health disorders (e.g., gastrointestinal
disorders, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, ca ncer) have been found to be associated with
prolonged exposure to shift work.
Relationship to Internat ional Classification of 
Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders,  2nd Edition (ICSD-2), differentiates nine
circadian rhythm sleep disord ers, including jet lag type.
Non–Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Arousal Disorders 399
Parasomnias 
Parasomnias are disorders characterized by abnormal behavioral, experiential, or physio-
logical events occurring in association with sleep, specific sleep stages, or sleep-wake tran-
sitions. The most common parasomnia s—non–rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep
arousal disorders and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavi or disorder—represent ad-
mixtures of wakefulness and NREM sleep an d wakefulness and REM sleep, respectively.
These conditions serve as a reminder that sleep and wakefulness are not mutually exclu-
sive and that sleep is not necessarily  a global, whole-brain phenomenon. 
Non–Rapid Eye Movement
Sleep Arousal Disorders
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recurrent episodes of incomplete awakeni ng from sleep, usually occurring during the
first third of the major sleep episode, accompanied by either one of the following:
1.Sleepwalking:  Repeated episodes of rising from bed during sleep and walking
about. While sleepwalking, the individual has a blank, staring face; is relatively un-
responsive to the efforts of others to communicate with him or her; and can be
awakened only with great difficulty.
2.Sleep terrors:  Recurrent episodes of abrupt terror arousals from sleep, usually be-
ginning with a panicky scream. There is intense fear and signs of autonomic
arousal, such as mydriasis, tachycardia, rapid breathing, and sweating, during
each episode. There is relative unresponsiveness to efforts of others to comfort the
individual during the episodes.
B. No or little (e.g., only a single visual scene) dream imagery is recalled.
C. Amnesia for the episodes is present.
D. The episodes cause clinically significant di stress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other important areas of functioning.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication).
F. Coexisting mental and medical disorders do not explain the episodes of sleepwalking
or sleep terrors.
Coding note:  For ICD-9-CM, code 307.46 for all subtypes. For ICD-10-CM, code is based
on subtype.
Specify whether:
307.46 (F51.3)  Sleepwalking type
Specify if:
With sleep-related eating
With sleep-related sexual behavior (sexsomnia)
307.46 (F51.4) Sleep terror type
400 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Diagnostic Features 
The essential feature of non– rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep arousal disorders is the
repeated occurrence of incomple te arousals, usually beginning during the first third of the
major sleep episode (Criterion A), that typica lly are brief, lasting 1–10 minutes, but may be
protracted, lasting up to 1 hour. The maximum duration of an event is unknown. The eyes
are typically open during these events. Many individuals exhibit both subtypes of arousals
on different occasions, which underscores the unitary underlying pathophysiology. The
subtypes reflect varying degrees of simult aneous occurrence of wakefulness and NREM
sleep, resulting in complex behaviors arising from sleep with varying degrees of conscious
awareness, motor activity, and autonomic activation.
The essential feature of sleepwalking is repeated episodes of complex motor behavior
initiated during sleep, including rising from bed and walking about (Criterion A1). Sleep-
walking episodes begin during any stage of NREM sleep, most commonly during slow-
wave sleep and therefore most often occurring during the firs t third of the night. During
episodes, the individual has reduced alertness and responsiveness, a blank stare, and rel-
ative unresponsiveness to communication with others or effo rts by others to awaken the
individual. If awakened during the episode (or on awakening the following morning), the
individual has limited recall for the episode. Af ter the episode, there may initially be a brief
period of confusion or difficult y orienting, followed by full recovery of cognitive function
and appropriate behavior. 
The essential feature of sleep terrors  is the repeated occurrenc e of precipitous awaken-
ings from sleep, usually beginning with a pani cky scream or cry (Criterion A2). Sleep ter-
rors usually begin during the first third of the major sleep episode and last 1–10 minutes,
but they may last considerably longer, partic ularly in children. The episodes are accom-
panied by impressive autonomic arousal and behavioral manifestations of intense fear.
During an episode, the individual is difficult to  awaken or comfort. If the individual awak-
ens after the sleep terror, little or none of th e dream, or only fragmentary, single images,
are recalled. During a typical episode of sleep terrors, the individual abruptly sits up in
bed screaming or crying, with a frightened ex pression and autonomic signs of intense anx-
iety (e.g., tachycardia,  rapid breathing, sweating, dilati on of the pupils). The individual
may be inconsolable and is usually unresponsive to the efforts of others to awaken or com-
fort him or her. Slee p terrors are also called “night terrors” or “pavor nocturnus.”
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Sleepwalking episodes can include a wide va riety of behaviors. Episodes may begin with
confusion: the individual may simply sit up in  bed, look about, or pick at the blanket or
sheet. This behavior then becomes progress ively complex. The in dividual may actually
leave the bed and walk into closets, out of th e room, and even out of buildings. Individuals
may use the bathroom, eat, talk, or engage in  more complex behaviors. Running and fran-
tic attempts to escape some apparent threat can also occur. Most behaviors during sleep-
walking episodes are routine and of low complexity. However, cases of unlocking doors
and even operating machinery (driving an au tomobile) have been reported. Sleepwalking
can also include inappropriate behavior (e.g.,  commonly, urinating in a closet or waste-
basket). Most episodes l ast for several minutes to a half hour but may be more protracted.
Inasmuch as sleep is a state of relative analgesia, painful injuries sustained during sleep-
walking may not be appreciated until awakening after the fact.
There are two “specialized” fo rms of sleepwalking: sleep-related eating behavior and
sleep-related sexual behavior (sexsomn ia or sleep sex). Individuals with sleep-related eating
experience unwanted recurrent episodes of eating with varying degrees of amnesia, rang-
ing from no awareness to full awareness with out the ability to not eat. During these epi-
sodes, inappropriate foods may be ingested. In dividuals with sleep-re lated eating disorder
may find evidence of their eating only the next morning. In sexsomnia,  varying degrees of
Non–Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Arousal Disorders 401
sexual activity (e.g., masturbation, fondling,  groping, sexual intercourse) occur as complex
behaviors arising from sleep wi thout conscious awareness. Th is condition is more common
in males and may result in serious interper sonal relationship problems or medicolegal
consequences.
During a typical episode of sleep terrors, th ere is often a sense of overwhelming dread,
with a compulsion to escape. Although fragmentary vivid dream images may occur, a story-
like dream sequence (as in nightmares) is not reported. Most commonly,  the individual does
not awaken fully, but returns to sleep and has amnesia for the episode on awakening the next
morning. Usually only one episode will occur on any one night. Occasionally several episodes
may occur at intervals throughout the night. Th ese events rarely arise during daytime naps. 
Prevalence
Isolated or infrequent NREM sleep arousal disorders are ve ry common in the general pop-
ulation. From 10% to 30% of children have had at least one episode of sleepwalking, and
2%–3% sleepwalk often. The prevalence of slee pwalking disorder, marked by repeated ep-
isodes and impairment or dist ress, is much lower, probably  in the range of 1%–5%. The
prevalence of sleepwalking episodes (not sleepwalking disorder) is 1.0%–7.0% among
adults, with weekly to monthly episodes o ccurring in 0.5%–0.7%. The lifetime prevalence
of sleepwalking in adults is 29.2%, with a p ast-year prevalence of sleepwalking of 3.6%.
The prevalence of sleep terrors in the general population is unknown. The prevalence
of sleep terror episodes (as op posed to sleep terror disorder, in which there is recurrence
and distress or impairment) is approximately 36.9 % at 18 months of age, 19.7% at 30 months
of age, and 2.2% in adults. 
Development and Course
NREM sleep arousal disorders occur most co mmonly in childhood and diminish in fre-
quency with increasing age. The onset of sl eepwalking in adults with no prior history of
sleepwalking as children should prompt a search for specific etiologies, such as obstruc-
tive sleep apnea, nocturnal seiz ures, or effect of medication. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Sedative use, sleep deprivation, sl eep-wake schedule disruptions, fa-
tigue, and physical or emotional stress increa se the likelihood of ep isodes. Fever and sleep
deprivation can produce an increased freq uency of NREM sleep arousal disorders. 
Genetic and physiological. A family history for sleepwalking or sleep terrors may oc-
cur in up to 80% of individuals who sleepwal k. The risk for sleepwalking is further in-
creased (to as much as 60% of offspring) when both parents have a history of the disorder.
Individuals with sleep terrors frequently ha ve a positive family history of either sleep
terrors or sleepwalking, with as high as a 10-fo ld increase in the prevalence of the disorder
among first-degree biological relatives. Slee p terrors are much more common in monozy-
gotic twins as compared with dizygotic twins.  The exact mode of inheritance is unknown.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Violent or sexual activity during sleepwalking episodes is more likely to occur in adults.
Eating during sleepwalking epis odes is more commonly seen in females. Sleepwalking oc-
curs more often in females during childhood but more often in males during adulthood. 
Older children and adults provide a more de tailed recollection of fearful images asso-
ciated with sleep terrors than do younger ch ildren, who are more likely to have complete
amnesia or report only a vague sense of fear. Among children, sleep terrors are more com-
mon in males than in females. Among adults, the sex ratio is even.
402 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Diagnostic Markers
NREM sleep arousal disorders arise from an y stage of NREM sleep but most commonly
from deep NREM sleep (slow-wave sleep). They are most likely to appear in the first third
of the night and do not commonly occur duri ng daytime naps. During the episode, the
polysomnogram may be obscured with movement artifact. In the absence of such artifact,
the electroencephalogram typically shows theta or alpha frequency activity during the ep-
isode, indicating partial or incomplete arousal. 
Polysomnography in conjunctio n with audiovisual monitoring  can be used to document
episodes of sleepwalking. In the absence of ac tually capturing an event during a polysomno-
graphic recording, there are no polysomnogra phic features that can serve as a marker for
sleepwalking. Sleep deprivation may increase the likelihood of capturing an event. As a group,
individuals who sleepwalk show instability of de ep NREM sleep, but th e overlap in findings
with individuals who do not sleepwalk is great en ough to preclude use of this indicator in es-
tablishing a diagnosis. Unlike arousals from RE M sleep associated with nightmares, in which
there is an increase in heart rate and respiratio n prior to the arousal, the NREM sleep arousals
of sleep terrors begin precipitou sly from sleep, without anticipatory autonomic changes. The
arousals are associated with impressive autono mic activity, with doubling or tripling of
the heart rate. The pathophysiology is poorly unde rstood, but there appears to be instability in
the deeper stages of NREM sleep. Absent capturing an event during a formal sleep study,
there are no reliable polysomnographic indicators  of the tendency to experience sleep terrors.
Functional Consequences of 
Non-REM Sleep Arousal Disorders
For the diagnosis of a NREM sl eep arousal disorder to be ma de, the individual or house-
hold members must experience clinically signi ficant distress or impairment, although pa-
rasomnia symptoms may occur occasionally in nonclinical populations and would be
subthreshold for the diagnosis. Embarrassment concerning the episodes can impair social
relationships. Social isolation or occupational difficulties ca n result. The determination of a
“disorder” depends on a number  of factors, which may vary on an individual basis and
will depend on the frequency of  events, potential for violence  or injurious behaviors, em-
barrassment, or disruption/distr ess of other household member s. Severity determination
is best made based on the nature or consequenc e of the behaviors rather  than simply on fre-
quency. Uncommonly, NREM sleep arousal disorders may result in serious injury to the
individual or to someone trying  to console the individual. Inju ries to others are confined to
those in close proximity; individuals are not “sought out.” Typically, sleepwalking in both
children and adults is not associated with si gnificant mental disorders. For individuals
with sleep-related eating behaviors, unknowingly preparing or eati ng food during the
sleep period may create problems  such as poor diabetes control, weight gain, injury (cuts
and burns), or consequences of  eating dangerous or toxic in edibles. NREM sleep arousal
disorders may rarely result in violent or injurious behaviors with forensic implications.
Differential Diagnosis
Nightmare disorder. In contrast to individuals with NREM sleep arousal disorders, in-
dividuals with nightmar e disorder typically awaken eas ily and completely, report vivid
storylike dreams accompanying the episodes, and tend to have episodes later in the night.
NREM sleep arousal disorders occur during NREM sleep, whereas nightmares usually oc-
cur during REM sleep. Parents of children with NREM sleep arousal disorders may mis-
interpret reports of fragme ntary imagery as nightmares.
Breathing-related sleep disorders. Breathing disorders during  sleep can also produce
confusional arousals with subsequent amnesi a. However, breathin g-related sleep disor-
ders are also characterized by characteristic  symptoms of snoring,  breathing pauses, and
Non–Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Arousal Disorders 403
daytime sleepiness. In some individuals, a breathing-related sleep disorder may precipi-
tate episodes of sleepwalking.
REM sleep behavior disorder. REM sleep behavior disorder may be difficult to distin-
guish from NREM sleep arousal disorders. REM sleep behavior  disorder is characterized
by episodes of prominent, co mplex movements, often involving personal injury arising
from sleep. In contrast to NR EM sleep arousal disorders, REM  sleep behavior disorder oc-
curs during REM sleep. Individuals with REM sleep behavior disorder awaken easily and
report more detailed and vivid dream content than do individuals wi th NREM sleep arousal
disorders. They often report that they “act out dreams.” 
Parasomnia overlap syndrome. Parasomnia overlap syndrome consists of clinical and
polysomnographic features of both sleepwa lking and REM sleep behavior disorder.
Sleep-related seizures. Some types of seizures can prod uce episodes of very unusual
behaviors that occur predominantly or exclu sively during sleep. Nocturnal seizures may
closely mimic NREM sleep arousal  disorders but tend to be more stereotypic in nature, oc-
cur multiple times nightly, and be more likel y to occur from daytime naps. The presence of
sleep-related seizures does not preclude the presence of NREM sleep arousal disorders.
Sleep-related seizures should be classified as a form of epilepsy.
Alcohol-induced blackouts. Alcohol-induced blackouts may be associated with extremely
complex behaviors in the absence of other suggestions of intoxication. They do not involve
the loss of consciousness but rather reflect an isolated di sruption of memory for events
during a drinking episode. By history, these behaviors may be  indistinguishable from those
seen in NREM sleep arousal disorders.
Dissociative amnesia, with dissociative fugue. Dissociative fugue may be extremely
difficult to distinguish from sleepwalking. Unlike all other parasomnias, nocturnal disso-
ciative fugue arises from a period of wakefu lness during sleep, rather than precipitously
from sleep without intervening wakefulness. A history of recurrent childhood physical or
sexual abuse is usually present (b ut may be difficult to obtain).
Malingering or other voluntary behavior occurring during wakefulness. As with disso-
ciative fugue, malingering or  other voluntary behavior o ccurring during wakefulness
arises from wakefulness.
Panic disorder. Panic attacks may also cause abrupt awakenings from deep NREM sleep
accompanied by fearfulness, but these episode s produce rapid and complete awakening with-
out the confusion, amnesia, or motor activity typical of NREM sleep arousal disorders. 
Medication-induced complex behaviors. Behaviors similar to those in NREM sleep
arousal disorders can be induced by use of, or withdrawal from, substances or medica-
tions (e.g., benzodiazepines, nonbenzodiazepine  sedative-hypnotics, opiates, cocaine, nic-
otine, antipsychotics, tricyclic antidepressant s, chloral hydrate). Such behaviors may arise
from the sleep period and may be extremel y complex. The underlying pathophysiology
appears to be a relatively isolated amnesia. In such cases, substance/medication-induced
sleep disorder, parasomnia type, should be diagnosed (see “Substance/Medication-
Induced Sleep Disorder” la ter in this chapter).
Night eating syndrome. The sleep-related eating disorder form of sleepwalking is to be
differentiated from night eating syndrome, in which there is a delay in the circadian rhythm
of food ingestion and an association  with insomnia and/or depression. 
Comorbidity
In adults, there is an association between sleepwalking and major depressive episodes and
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Children or ad ults with sleep terro rs may have elevated
scores for depression and anxiet y on personality inventories. 
404 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Relationship to Internat ional Classification of 
Sleep Disorders
The International Classificat ion of Sleep Disorders,  2nd Edition, includes “confusional
arousal” as a NREM sleep arousal disorder.
Nightmare Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 307.47 (F51.5)
A. Repeated occurrences of extended, extremely dysphoric, and well-remembered
dreams that usually involve efforts to avoid threats to survival, security, or physical in-
tegrity and that generally occur during the second half of the major sleep episode.
B. On awakening from the dysphoric dreams, the individual rapidly becomes oriented and
alert.
C. The sleep disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, oc-
cupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The nightmare symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a sub-
stance (e.g., a drug of abuse, a medication).
E. Coexisting mental and medical disorders do not adequately explain the predominant
complaint of dysphoric dreams.
Specify if:
During sleep onset
Specify if:
With associated non–sleep disorder, including substance use disorders
With associated othe r medical condition
With associated ot her sleep disorder
Coding note:  The code 307.47 (F51.5) applies to all three specifiers. Code also the
relevant associated mental disorder, medical condition, or other sleep disorder imme-
diately after the code for nightmare disorder in order to indicate the association.
Specify if:
Acute:  Duration of period of nightmares is 1 month or less.
Subacute:  Duration of period of nightmares is greater than 1 month but less than
6 months.
Persistent:  Duration of period of nightmares is 6 months or greater.
Specify current severity: 
Severity can be rated by the frequency with which the nightmares occur:
Mild:  Less than one episode per week on average.
Moderate: One or more episodes per week but less than nightly.
Severe:  Episodes nightly.
Diagnostic Features
Nightmares  are typically lengthy, elaborate, st orylike sequences of dream imagery that
seem real and that incite anxiety, fear, or  other dysphoric emotio ns. Nightmare content
typically focuses on attempts to avoid or cope with immi nent danger but may involve
themes that evoke other negative emotions. Nightmares occurring after traumatic experi-
ences may replicate the threatening situation (“replicative nightmares”), but most do not.
On awakening, nightmares are well remembered and can be described in detail. They arise
Nightmare Disorder 405
almost exclusively during rapid eye moveme nt (REM) sleep and can thus occur through-
out sleep but are more likely in the second half of the major sleep episode when dreaming
is longer and more intense. Factors that incr ease early-night REM intensity, such as sleep
fragmentation or deprivation, jet lag, and REM-sensitive medications, might facilitate
nightmares earlier in the night, including at sleep onset.
Nightmares usually terminate with awakening and rapid return of full alertness. How-
ever, the dysphoric emotions may persist into wakefulness and contribute to difficulty re-
turning to sleep and lasting daytime distress . Some nightmares, known as “bad dreams,”
may not induce awakening and are recalled only later. If nightmare s occur during sleep-
onset REM periods ( hypnagogic ), the dysphoric emotion is frequently accompanied by a
sense of being both awake and unable to move voluntarily ( isolated sleep paralysis ). 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Mild autonomic arousal, including sweating, tachycardia, and tachypnea, may character-
ize nightmares. Body movements and vocalizations are not characteristic because of REM
sleep–related loss of skeletal  muscle tone, but such behavi ors may occur under situations
of emotional stress or sleep fragmentation and in posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
When talking or emoting occurs, it is typica lly a brief event terminating the nightmare. 
Individuals with frequent nightmares are at substantially greater r isk for suicidal ide-
ation and suicide attempts, even when gender  and mental illness are taken into account. 
Prevalence
Prevalence of nightmares in creases through childhood into adolescence. From 1.3% to
3.9% of parents report that their preschool children have nightmares “often” or “always”.
Prevalence increases from ages 10 to 13 for both males and females but continues to in-
crease to ages 20–29 for females (while decreasing for males), when it can be twice as high
for females as for males. Prevalen ce decreases steadily with age for both sexes, but the gen-
der difference remains. Among adults, prevalen ce of nightmares at least monthly is 6%,
whereas prevalence for frequent nightmare s is 1%–2%. Estimates often combine idio-
pathic and posttraumatic nightmares indiscriminately.
Development and Course
Nightmares often begin between ages 3 and 6 years but reach a peak prevalence and se-
verity in late adolescence or  early adulthood. Nigh tmares most likely appear in children
exposed to acute or chronic psychosocial stressors and thus may not resolve spontane-
ously. In a minority, frequent nightmares pers ist into adulthood, becoming virtually a life-
long disturbance. Although specific nightm are content may reflect the individual’s age,
the essential features of the diso rder are the same across age groups. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Individuals who experience nightmares  report more frequent past ad-
verse events, but not necessarily trauma, an d often display personality disturbances or
psychiatric diagnosis. 
Environmental. Sleep deprivation or fragmentation, and irregular sleep-wake schedules
that alter the timing, intensity,  or quantity of REM sleep, can put individuals at risk for
nightmares.
Genetic and physiological. Twin studies have identified genetic effects on the disposi-
tion to nightmares and their co-occurrence with other parasomnias (e.g., sleeptalking). 
Course modifiers. Adaptive parental bedside behaviors, such as soothing the child fol-
lowing nightmares, may protect agai nst developing chronic nightmares. 
406 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The significance attributed to nightmares may va ry by culture, and sensitivity to such be-
liefs may facilitate disclosure.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Adult females report having ni ghtmares more frequently th an do adult males. Nightmare
content differs by sex, with adult females tend ing to report themes of sexual harassment or
of loved ones disappearing/dying, and adult males tending to report themes of physical
aggression or war/terror. 
Diagnostic Markers
Polysomnographic studies demonstrate abrupt awakenings from REM sleep, usually during
the second half of the night, prior to report of a nightmare. Heart, respiratory, and eye move-
ment rates may quicken or increase in variab ility before awakening.  Nightmares following
traumatic events may also arise during non-REM (NREM), particularly stage 2, sleep. The typ-
ical sleep of individuals with nightmares is mild ly impaired (e.g., redu ced efficiency, less slow-
wave sleep, more awakenings), with more frequent periodic leg movements in sleep and rel-
ative sympathetic nervous system activation after REM sleep deprivation. 
Functional Consequences  of Nightmare Disorder
Nightmares cause more significant subjective distress than demonstrable social or occu-
pational impairment. However, if awakenings are frequent or result in sleep avoidance,
individuals may experience excessive daytime sleepiness, poor concentration, depression,
anxiety, or irritability. Freque nt childhood nightmares (e.g.,  several per week), may cause
significant distress to parents and child.
Differential Diagnosis
Sleep terror disorder. Both nightmare disorder and sleep  terror disorder include awak-
enings or partial awakenings with fearfuln ess and autonomic activation, but the two dis-
orders are differentiable. Nightmares typically occur later in the night, during REM sleep,
and produce vivid, storylike, and clearly re called dreams; mild autonomic arousal; and
complete awakenings. Sleep terrors typically arise in the first third of the night during
stage 3 or 4 NREM sleep and produce either no dream recall or images without an elabo-
rate storylike quality. The terr ors lead to partial awakenings that leave the individual con-
fused, disoriented, and only partially resp onsive and with substantial autonomic arousal.
There is usually amnesia for the event in the morning. 
REM sleep behavior disorder. The presence of complex motor activity during fright-
ening dreams should prompt further evaluation for REM sleep behavior disorder, which
occurs more typically among late middle-age  males and, unlike nightmare disorder, is as-
sociated with often violent dream enactment s and a history of nocturnal injuries. The
dream disturbance of REM sleep behavior diso rder is described by patients as nightmares
but is controlled by appropriate medication. 
Bereavement. Dysphoric dreams may occur during bereavement but typically involve
loss and sadness and are followed by self-refle ction and insight, rather than distress, on
awakening. 
Narcolepsy. Nightmares are a frequent complaint in  narcolepsy, but the presence of ex-
cessive sleepiness and cataplexy differentiates  this condition from  nightmare disorder. 
Nocturnal seizures. Seizures may rarely manifest as nightmares and should be evalu-
ated with polysomnography and continuous video electroencephalography. Nocturnal
seizures usually involve stereotypical motor activity. Associated nightmares, if recalled,
Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder 407
are often repetitive in nature or reflect epilept ogenic features such as the content of diurnal
auras (e.g., unmotivated dread), phosphenes, or  ictal imagery. Disord ers of arousal, espe-
cially confusional arousals, may also be present.
Breathing-related sleep disorders. Breathing-related sleep disorders can lead to awaken-
ings with autonomic arousal, but these are not usually accompanied by recall of nightmares. 
Panic disorder. Attacks arising during sleep can produce abrupt awakenings with au-
tonomic arousal and fearfulness, but nightmares are typically not reported and symptoms
are similar to panic attacks arising during wakefulness. 
Sleep-related dissociative disorders. Individuals may recall actual physical or emo-
tional trauma as a “dream” during elec troencephalography-documented awakenings.
Medication or substance use. Numerous substances/medicat ions can precipitate night-
mares, including dopaminergics; beta-adrener gic antagonists and other antihypertensives;
amphetamine, cocaine, and other stimulants; antidepressants; smoking cessation aids;
and melatonin. Withdrawal of REM sleep–su ppressant medications (e.g., antidepressants)
and alcohol can produce REM sleep rebound accompanied by nightmares. If nightmares
are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention, a diagnosis of substance/
medication-induced sleep disorder should be considered. 
Comorbidity
Nightmares may be comorbid with several medical conditions, including coronary heart
disease, cancer, parkinsonism, and pain, and ca n accompany medical treatments, such as he-
modialysis, or withdrawal from medications or  substances of abuse. Nightmares frequently
are comorbid with other mental disorders, in cluding PTSD; insomnia disorder; schizophrenia;
psychosis; mood, anxiety, adjustment, and personality disorders; and grief during be-
reavement. A concurrent nightmare disorder diagnosis should only be considered when in-
dependent clinical attention is warranted (i.e., Criteria A–C are met). Otherwise, no separate
diagnosis is necessary. These conditions should be listed under the appropriate comorbid
category specifier. However, nightmare disorder  may be diagnosed as a separate disorder in
individuals with PTSD if the nightmares are temporally unrelated to PTSD (i.e., preceding
other PTSD symptoms or persisting after other PTSD symptoms have resolved).
Nightmares are normally characteristic of REM sleep behavior disorder, PTSD, and acute
stress disorder, but nightmare di sorder may be independently coded if nightmares preceded
the condition and their frequency or severity necessitates independent clinical attention. The
latter may be determined by asking whether ni ghtmares were a proble m before onset of the
other disorder and whether they continued after other symptoms had remitted. 
Relationship to Internat ional Classification of 
Sleep Disorders
The International Classification of Sleep Disorders,  2nd Edition (ICSD-2), presents similar di-
agnostic criteria fo r nightmare disorder.
Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 327.42 (G47.52)
A. Repeated episodes of arousal during sleep associated with vocalization and/or com-
plex motor behaviors. 
B. These behaviors arise during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and therefore usually
occur more than 90 minutes after sleep onset, are more frequent during the later por-
tions of the sleep period, and uncommonly occur during daytime naps. 
408 Sleep-Wake Disorders
C. Upon awakening from these episodes, the individual is completely awake, alert, and
not confused or disoriented.
D. Either of the following: 
1. REM sleep without atonia on polysomnographic recording.
2. A history suggestive of REM sleep behavior disorder and an established synuclein-
opathy diagnosis (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, multiple system atrophy).
E. The behaviors cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning (which may include injury to self or the
bed partner).
F. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a
drug of abuse, a medication) or another medical condition.
G. Coexisting mental and medical disorders do not explain the episodes.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder is repeated
episodes of arousal, often associated with vo calizations and/or complex motor behaviors
arising from REM sleep (Criterion A). These be haviors often reflect motor responses to the
content of action-filled or violent dreams of being attacked or trying to escape from a
threatening situation, which may be termed dream enacting behaviors. The vocalizations are
often loud, emotion-fill ed, and profane. These behaviors may be very bothersome to the
individual and the bed partner and may result in significant injury (e.g., falling, jumping,
or flying out of bed; running, punching, thru sting, hitting, or kicking). Upon awakening,
the individual is immediately awake, alert, and oriented (Criterion C) and is often able to
recall dream mentation, which closely correlates with the observed behavior. The eyes
typically remain closed during these events. The diagnosis of REM sleep behavior disor-
der requires clinically significant distress or  impairment (Criterion  E); this determination
will depend on a number of factors, including the frequency of events, the potential for vi-
olence or injurious behaviors, embarrassment , and distress in othe r household members. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Severity determination is best made based on  the nature or conseq uence of the behavior
rather than simply on frequency. Although the behaviors are typically prominent and vi-
olent, lesser behaviors may also occur. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of REM sleep behavior disord er is approximately 0.38%–0.5% in the gen-
eral population. Prevalence in patients with psychiatric disorders may be greater, possibly
related to medications prescribed for the psychiatric disorder.
Development and Course
The onset of REM sleep behavior disorder may be gradual or rapid, and the course is usu-
ally progressive. REM sleep behavior disorder associated with neurodegenerative disor-
ders may improve as the unde rlying neurodegenerative disorder progresses. Because of
the very high association with the later appe arance of an underlyi ng neurodegenerative
disorder, most notably one of the synucleino pathies (Parkinson’s disease, multiple system
atrophy, or major or mild neurocognitive di sorder with Lewy bodies), the neurological
status of individuals with REM sleep behavior disorder should be closely monitored.
REM sleep behavior disorder overwhelmingly affects males older than 50 years, but in-
creasingly this disorder is being identified in females and in younger individuals. Symp-
Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder 409
toms in young individuals, particularly young females, should raise the possibility of
narcolepsy or medication-induced REM sleep behavior disorder. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Genetic and physiological. Many widely prescribed medications, including tricyclic
antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, serotonin-norepinephrine reup-
take inhibitors, and beta-blockers, may resu lt in polysomnographic evidence of REM sleep
without atonia and in frank REM sleep behavior disorder. It is not known whether the
medications per se result in REM sleep behavi or disorder or they unmask an underlying
predisposition.
Diagnostic Markers
Associated laboratory findin gs from polysomnography indicate increased tonic and/or
phasic electromyographic activi ty during REM sleep that is normally associated with mus-
cle atonia. The increased muscle activity variably affects different muscle groups, mandating
more extensive electromyographi c monitoring than is employed in conventional sleep stud-
ies. For this reason, it is su ggested that electrom yographic monitoring include the submen-
talis, bilateral extensor digito rum, and bilateral anterior tibi alis muscle groups. Continuous
video monitoring is mandator y. Other polysomnographic findings may include very fre-
quent periodic and aperiodic extremity el ectromyography acti vity during non-REM
(NREM) sleep. This polysomnography observation, termed REM sleep without atonia,  is pres-
ent in virtually all cases of REM sleep behavi or disorder but may also be an asymptomatic
polysomnographic finding. Clinical dream-enacting behaviors coupled with the polysom-
nographic finding of REM without atonia is necessary for the diagnosis of REM sleep behav-
ior disorder. REM sleep without atonia with out a clinical history of dream-enacting
behaviors is simply an asymptomatic polyso mnographic observation. It is not known
whether isolated REM sleep without atonia is a precursor to REM sleep behavior disorder.
Functional Consequences of 
Rapid Eye Movement Sl eep Behavior Disorder
REM sleep behavior disorder may occur in isol ated occasions in otherwise unaffected in-
dividuals. Embarrassment concer ning the episodes can impair social relationships. Indi-
viduals may avoid situations in which others might become aware of the disturbance,
visiting friends overnight, or sleeping with be d partners. Social isolation or occupational
difficulties can result. Uncommonly, REM sleep  behavior disorder may result in serious
injury to the victim or to the bed partner.
Differential Diagnosis
Other parasomnias. Confusional arousals, sleepwalking, and sleep terrors can easily be
confused with REM sleep behavior disorder. In  general, these disorders occur in younger
individuals. Unlike REM sleep behavior disorder, they arise from deep NREM sleep and
therefore tend to occur in the early portion of the sleep period. Awakening from a confu-
sional arousal is associated with confusion, disorientation, and incomplete recall of dream
mentation accompanying the behavior. Polysomnographic monitoring in the disorders of
arousal reveals normal REM atonia.
Nocturnal seizures. Nocturnal seizures may perfectly mimic REM sleep behavior disor-
der, but the behaviors are generally more st ereotyped. Polysomnographic monitoring em-
ploying a full electroencephalographic seiz ure montage may differentiate the two. REM
sleep without atonia is not present on polysomnographic monitoring.
410 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Obstructive sleep apnea. Obstructive sleep apnea may result in behaviors indistin-
guishable from REM sleep behavior disorder . Polysomnographic monitoring is necessary
to differentiate between the two. In this ca se, the symptoms resolv e following effective
treatment of the obstructive sleep apnea, and REM sleep without atonia is not present on
polysomnography monitoring.
Other specified dissociative disorder (sleep-related psychogenic dissociative disorder).
Unlike virtually all other parasomnias, which arise precipitously from NREM or REM
sleep, psychogenic dissociative behaviors aris e from a period of well-defined wakefulness
during the sleep period. Unlike REM sleep behavi or disorder, this condition is more prev-
alent in young females.
Malingering. Many cases of malingering in which the individual reports problematic
sleep movements perfectly mimic the clinical features of REM sleep behavior disorder,
and polysomnographic documentation is mandatory.
Comorbidity
REM sleep behavior diso rder is present concurrently in  approximately 30% of patients
with narcolepsy. When it occurs in narcolep sy, the demographics reflect the younger age
range of narcolepsy, with equal frequency in  males and females. Based on findings from
individuals presenting to sleep clinics, most individuals (>50%) with initially “idiopathic”
REM sleep behavior disorder will eventually develop a neurodegenerative disease—most
notably, one of the synucleinopathies (Parkins on’s disease, multiple system atrophy, or
major or mild neurocognitive disorder with Lewy bodies).  REM sleep behavior disorder
often predates any other sign of these disorder s by many years (often more than a decade).
Relationship to Internat ional Classification of 
Sleep Disorders
REM sleep behavior disorder is virtually identical to REM sleep beha vior disorder in the
International Classification of Sleep Disorders,  2nd Edition (ICSD-2).
Restless Legs Syndrome
Diagnostic Criteria 333.94 (G25.81)
A. An urge to move the legs, usually accompanied by or in response to uncomfortable and
unpleasant sensations in the legs, characterized by all of the following:
1. The urge to move the legs begins or wors ens during periods of rest or inactivity.
2. The urge to move the legs is partial ly or totally relieved by movement.
3. The urge to move the legs is worse in the evening or at night than during the day,
or occurs only in the evening or at night. 
B. The symptoms in Criterion A occur at least three times per week and have persisted
for at least 3 months.
C. The symptoms in Criterion A are accompanied by significant distress or impairment in
social, occupational, educational, academic, behavioral, or other important areas of
functioning. 
D. The symptoms in Criterion A are not attributable to another mental disorder or medical
condition (e.g., arthritis, l eg edema, peripheral ischemia, leg cramps) and are not better
explained by a behavioral condition (e.g., positional discomfort, h abitual foot tapping).
E. The symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects of a drug of abuse or
medication (e.g., akathisia).
Restless Legs Syndrome 411
Diagnostic Features
Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is  a sensorimotor, neurological sleep disorder characterized
by a desire to move the legs or arms, usua lly associated with uncomfortable sensations
typically described as creeping, crawling, tingling, burning, or itch ing (Criterion A). The
diagnosis of RLS is based primarily on patient self-report and history. Symptoms are
worse when the individual is at rest, and freq uent movements of the legs occur in an effort
to relieve the uncomfortable sensations. Sympto ms are worse in the evening or night, and
in some individuals they occur only in the ev ening or night. Evening worsening occurs in-
dependently of any differences in activity. It is important to differentiate RLS from other
conditions such as positional discom fort and leg cramps (Criterion D).
The symptoms of RLS can delay sleep onset and awaken the individual from sleep and
are associated with significant sleep fragmentation. The relief obtained from moving the
legs may no longer be apparent in severe ca ses. RLS is associated with daytime sleepiness
and is frequently accompanied by significant clinical distress or functional impairment.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Periodic leg movements in sleep (PLMS) can serve as corroborating ev idence for RLS, with
up to 90% of individuals di agnosed with RLS demonstratin g PLMS when recordings are
taken over multiple nights. Periodic leg mo vements during wakefulness are supportive of
an RLS diagnosis. Reports of difficulty initiating and maintaining sleep and of excessive
daytime sleepiness may also support the diagnosis of RLS. Additional supportive features
include a family history of RLS among first- degree relatives and a reduction in symptoms,
at least initially, with dopaminergic treatment. 
Prevalence 
Prevalence rates of RLS vary widely when br oad criteria are utilized but range from 2% to
7.2% when more defined criteria are employed . When frequency of symptoms is at least
three times per week with moderate or severe distress, the prevalence rate is 1.6%; when
frequency of symptoms is a minimum of one ti me per week, the prevalence rate is 4.5%.
Females are 1.5–2 times more likely than males to have RLS. RLS also increases with age.
The prevalence of RLS may be lower in Asian populations. 
Development and Course
The onset of RLS typically occurs in the seco nd or third decade. Approximately 40% of in-
dividuals diagnosed with RLS during adul thood report having experienced symptoms
before age 20 years, and 20% report having experienced symptoms before age 10 years.
Prevalence rates of RLS increase steadily with age until about age 60 years, with symptoms
remaining stable or decreasing slightly in older age groups. Compared with nonfamilial
cases, familial RLS usually has a younger age at  onset and a slower pr ogressive course. The
clinical course of RLS differs by age at onset.  When onset occurs before age 45, there is of-
ten a slow progression of symptoms. In late-onset RLS, rapid progression is typical, and
aggravating factors are common. Symptoms of RLS appear similar acro ss the lifespan, re-
maining stable or decreasing slightly in older age groups.
Diagnosis of RLS in children can be diff icult because of the self-report component.
While Criterion A for adults assumes that the description of “urge to move” is by the pa-
tient, pediatric diagnosis requir es a description in the child’s own words rather than by a
parent or caretaker. Typically children age 6 years or older are able to provide detailed, ad-
equate descriptors of RLS. However, children rarely use or understand the word “urge,”
reporting instead that their legs “have to” or  “got to” move. Also, potentially related to
prolonged periods of sitting during class, tw o-thirds of children and adolescents report
daytime leg sensations. Thus, fo r diagnostic Criterion A3, it is important to compare equal
412 Sleep-Wake Disorders
duration of sitting or lying down in the day to sitting or lying down in the evening or night.
Nocturnal worsening tends to persist even in the context of pediatric RLS. As with RLS in
adults, there is a significant negative impact on sleep, mood, cognition, and function. Im-
pairment in children and adolescents is mani fested more often in behavioral and educa-
tional domains. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Genetic and physiological. Predisposing factors includ e female gender, advancing
age, genetic risk variants, an d family history of RLS. Precipitating factors are often time-
limited, such as iron defici ency, with most individuals resuming normal sleep patterns
after the initial triggering even t has disappeared. Genetic risk variants also play a role in
RLS secondary to such disorder s as uremia, suggesting that individuals with a genetic sus-
ceptibility develop RLS in the presence of further risk factors. RLS has a strong familial
component. 
There are defined pathophysi ological pathways subserving RLS. Genome-wide asso-
ciation studies have found that RLS is significantly associated with common genetic vari-
ants in intronic or intergenic regions in MEIS1 , BTBD9 , and MAP2K5  on chromosomes 2p,
6p, and 15q, respectively. The ass ociation of these three varian ts with RLS has been inde-
pendently replicated. BTBD9  confers a very large (80%) exce ssive risk when even a single
allele is present. Because of the high frequenc y of this variant in individuals of European
descent, the population attributable risk (P AR) approximates 50%. At-risk alleles associ-
ated with MEIS1  and BTBD9  are less common in individuals of African or Asian descent,
perhaps suggesting lower risk fo r RLS in these populations. 
Pathophysiological mechanisms in RLS also in clude disturbances in the central dopa-
minergic system and disturbances in iron  metabolism. The endo genous opiate system
may also be involved. Treatment effect s of dopaminergic drugs (primarily D2 and D3 non-
ergot agonists) provide further support that  RLS is grounded in dysfunctional central
dopaminergic pathways. While the effective treatment of RLS has also been shown to sig-
nificantly reduce depressive symptoms, seroto nergic antidepressants can induce or aggra-
vate RLS in some individuals. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Although RLS is more prevalent in females than  in males, there are no diagnostic differ-
ences according to gender. However, the prev alence of RLS during pregnancy is two to
three times greater than in the general population. RLS associated with pregnancy peaks
during the third trimester and improves or reso lves in most cases soon after delivery. The
gender difference in prevalence of RLS is explai ned at least in part by parity, with nullipa-
rous females being at the same r isk of RLS as age-matched males.
Diagnostic Markers
Polysomnography demonstrates  significant abnormalities in RLS, commonly increased
latency to sleep, and higher arousal index.  Polysomnography with a preceding immobili-
zation test may provide an indicator of the motor sign of RLS, periodic limb movements,
under standard conditions of sleep and during quiet resting, both of which can provoke RLS
symptoms.
Functional Consequences of Restless Legs Syndrome
Forms of RLS severe enough to si gnificantly impair functioning or  associated with mental dis-
orders, including depression an d anxiety, occur in approximately 2%–3% of the population. 
Although the impact of milder  symptoms is less well ch aracterized, in dividuals with
RLS complain of disruption in at  least one activity of daily li ving, with up to 50% reporting
Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder 413
a negative impact on mood, and 47.6% reporting a lack of energy. The most common conse-
quences of RLS are sleep disturbance, includ ing reduced sleep time , sleep fragmentation,
and overall disturbance; depression, generalize d anxiety disorder, panic disorder, and post-
traumatic stress disorder; and quality-of-life impairments. RLS can result in daytime sleep-
iness or fatigue and is frequently accompanied by significant distress or impairment in
affective, social, occupational, educational, academic, behavioral, or cognitive functioning. 
Differential Diagnosis 
The most important conditions in the differential diagnosis of RLS are leg cramps, posi-
tional discomfort, arthralgias/arthritis, myalgias, positional ischemia (numbness), leg
edema, peripheral neuropathy, radiculopathy,  and habitual foot tapping. “Knotting” of
the muscle (cramps), relief with a single postural shift, limitation to joints, soreness to pal-
pation (myalgias), and other abnormalities on physical exam ination are not characteristic
of RLS. Unlike RLS, nocturnal leg cramps do not typically present with the desire to move
the limbs nor are there frequent limb movements.  Less common conditions to be differen-
tiated from RLS include neuroleptic-induced akathisia, myelopathy, symptomatic venous
insufficiency, peripheral artery disease, ec zema, other orthopedic problems, and anxiety-
induced restlessness. Worsening at night an d periodic limb movements are more common
in RLS than in medication-induced akathisia or peripheral neuropathy. 
While is it important that RLS symptoms not be solely accounted for by another medical
or behavioral condition, it should also be appreciated that any of thes e similar conditions can
occur in an individual with RLS. This necessi tates a separate focus on each possible condi-
tion in the diagnostic process and when assessing impact. For cases in which the diagnosis of
RLS is not certain, evaluation for the supportive features of RLS, particularly PLMS or a fam-
ily history of RLS, may be helpful. Clinical features, such as response to a dopaminergic
agent and positive family history for RLS,  can help with the differential diagnosis.
Comorbidity
Depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, an d attentional disorder s are commonly comor-
bid with RLS and are discussed in the sectio n “Functional Consequences of Restless Legs
Syndrome.” The main medical disorder comorbid with RLS is cardiovascular disease.
There may be an association with numerous other medical disorders,  including hyperten-
sion, narcolepsy, migraine, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, peripheral neuropathy,
obstructive sleep apnea, diabetes mellitus, fibromyalgia, osteoporosis, obesity, thyroid
disease, and cancer. Iron defi ciency, pregnancy, and chronic renal failure are also comor-
bid with RLS.
Relationship to Internat ional Classification of 
Sleep Disorders
The International Classifica tion of Sleep Disorders, 2nd Edition (ICSD-2), presents similar diag-
nostic criteria for RLS but does not contain a criterion specifying fr equency or duration of
symptoms.
Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. A prominent and severe disturbance in sleep.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings of both
(1) and (2):
414 Sleep-Wake Disorders
1. The symptoms in Criterion A developed during or soon after substance intoxication
or after withdrawal from or exposure to a medication.
2. The involved substance/medication is capable of producing the symptoms in Crite-
rion A.
C. The disturbance is not better explained by a sleep disorder that is not substance/
medication-induced. Such evidence of an independent sleep disorder could include
the following:
The symptoms precede the onset of the substance/medication use; the symptoms
persist for a substantial period of time (e.g., about 1 month) after the cessation of
acute withdrawal or severe intoxication; or there is other evidence suggesting the
existence of an independent non-substance/medication-induced sleep disorder
(e.g., a history of recurrent non-substance/medication-related episodes).
D. The disturbance does not occur exclusively during the course of a delirium.
E. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Note: This diagnosis should be made instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical
picture and when they are sufficiently severe to warrant clinical attention.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for the [specific substance/medica-
tion]-induced sleep disorders are indicated in the table below. Note that the ICD-10-CM
code depends on whether or not there is a comorbid substance use disorder present for
the same class of substance. If a mild substance use disorder is comorbid with the sub-
stance-induced sleep disorder, the 4th position character is “1,” and the clinician should
record “mild [substance] use disorder” before the substance-induced sleep disorder (e.g.,
“mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induc ed sleep disorder”). If a moderate or severe
substance use disorder is comorbid with the substance-induced sleep disorder, the 4th po-
sition character is “2,” and the clinician shoul d record “moderate [substance] use disorder”
or “severe [substance] use disorder,” depending on the severity of the comorbid substance
use disorder. If there is no comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., after a one-time heavy
use of the substance), then the 4th position character is “9,” and the clinician should record
only the substance-induced sleep disorder. A m oderate or severe tobacco use disorder is
required in order to code a tobacco-induced sleep disorder; it is not permissible to code a
comorbid mild tobacco use disorder or no tobacco use disorder with a tobacco-induced
sleep disorder.
Specify whether:
Insomnia type:  Characterized by difficulty falling asleep or maintaining sleep, frequent
nocturnal awakenings, or nonrestorative sleep.
Daytime sleepiness type: Characterized by predominant complaint of excessive
sleepiness/fatigue during waking hours or, less commonly, a long sleep period.
Parasomnia type:  Characterized by abnormal behavioral events during sleep.
Mixed type: Characterized by a substance/m edication-induced sleep problem charac-
terized by multiple types of sleep symptoms, but no symptom clearly predominates.
Specify if (see Table 1 in the chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders” for di-
agnoses associated with substance class):
With onset during intoxication:  This specifier should be used if criteria are met for
intoxication with the substance/medication and symptoms developed during the intox-
ication period.
With onset during disco ntinuation/withdrawal:  This specifier should be used if cri-
teria are met for discontinuation/withdrawal  from the substance/medication and symp-
toms developed during, or shortly after, discontinuation of the substance/medication.
Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder 415
Recording Procedures
ICD-9-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorder begins with
the specific substance (e.g., cocaine, bupropion)  that is presumed to be causing the sleep
disturbance. The diagnostic code is selected from the table included in the criteria set,
which is based on the drug class. For substances  that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g.,
bupropion), the code for “other substance” should be used; and in cases in which a sub-
stance is judged to be an etiological factor but the specific class of substance is unknown,
the category “unknown substance” should be used.
The name of the disorder is followed by the sp ecification of onset (i.e., onset during in-
toxication, onset during discontinuation/withdrawal), followed by the subtype designa-
tion (i.e., insomnia type, daytime sleepine ss type, parasomnia type, mixed type). Unlike
the recording procedures for ICD-10-CM, wh ich combine the substance-induced disorder
and substance use disorder into a single code, for ICD-9-CM a separate diagnostic code
is given for the substance use disorder. For ex ample, in the case of insomnia occurring
during withdrawal in a man with a severe lorazepam use disorder, the diagnosis is 292.85
lorazepam-induced sleep disorder, with onset during withdrawal, insomnia type. An ad-
ditional diagnosis of 304.10 severe lorazepam us e disorder is also given. When more than
one substance is judged to play a significant role in the developmen t of the sleep distur-
bance, each should be listed separately (e.g., 292.85 alcohol-induced sleep disorder, with
onset during intoxication, insomnia type; 292. 85 cocaine-induced sleep disorder, with on-
set during intoxication, insomnia type). 
ICD-10-CM. The name of the substance/medication-induced sleep disorder begins with the
specific substance (e.g., cocaine,  bupropion) that is presumed to be causing the sleep distur-
bance. The diagnostic code is selected from the ta ble included in the criteria set, which is based
on the drug class and presence or absence of a comorbid substance use disorder. For sub-
stances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., bupropion), the code for “other substance”
should be used; and in cases in which a substance is judged to be an etiological factor but the
specific class of substance is unknown, the category “unknown substance” should be used.
When recording the name of the disorder, th e comorbid substance use disorder (if any)
is listed first, followed by the word “with,” followed by the name of the substance-induced
sleep disorder, followed by the specification of onset (i.e., onset during intoxication, onsetICD-10-CM
ICD-9-CMWith use 
disorder, 
mildWith use 
disorder, 
moderate 
or severeWithout 
use 
disorder
Alcohol 291.82 F10.182 F10.282 F10.982
Caffeine 292.85 F15.182 F15.282 F15.982
Cannabis 292.85 F12.188 F12.288 F12.988
Opioid 292.85 F11.182 F11.282 F11.982
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic 292.85 F13.182 F13.282 F13.982
Amphetamine (or other 
stimulant)292.85 F15.182 F15.282 F15.982
Cocaine 292.85 F14.182 F14.282 F14.982
Tobacco 292.85 NA F17.208 NA
Other (or unknown) substance 292.85 F19.182 F19.282 F19.982
416 Sleep-Wake Disorders
during discontinuation/withdrawal), followed by the subtype designation (i.e., insomnia
type, daytime sleepiness type, parasomnia type , mixed type). For example, in the case of
insomnia occurring during withdrawal in a ma n with a severe lorazepam use disorder, the
diagnosis is F13.282 severe lorazepam use disorder with lorazepam-induced sleep disor-
der, with onset during withdrawal, insomnia  type. A separate diagnosis of the comorbid
severe lorazepam use disorder is not given. If  the substance-induced sleep disorder occurs
without a comorbid substance use disorder (e.g., with medication use), no accompanying
substance use disorder is noted (e.g., F19.98 2 bupropion-induced sleep disorder, with on-
set during medication use, insomnia type). When more than one substance is judged to
play a significant role in the development of the sleep disturbance, each should be listed
separately (e.g., F10.282 severe  alcohol use disorder with alcohol-induced sleep disorder,
with onset during intoxication, insomnia ty pe; F14.282 severe cocaine use disorder with
cocaine-induced sleep disord er, with onset during into xication, insomnia type).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of substance/medication -induced sleep disorder is a prominent sleep
disturbance that is suffi ciently severe to warrant independen t clinical attent ion (Criterion A)
and that is judged to be primarily associated with the pharmacological effects of a substance
(i.e., a drug of abuse, a medication, toxin ex posure) (Criterion B). Depending on the sub-
stance involved, one of four types of sleep di sturbances is reported. Insomnia type and day-
time sleepiness type are most common, while parasomnia type is seen less often. The mixed
type is noted when more than one type of sl eep disturbance–related symptom is present and
none predominates. The disturbance must not be better explained by another sleep disorder
(Criterion C). A substance/medication-induced sleep disorder is distinguished from insom-
nia disorder or a disorder associated with excessive daytime sleepines s by considering onset
and course. For drugs of abuse, there must be evidence of intoxication or withdrawal from
the history, physical examination, or laboratory findings. Substance/medication-induced
sleep disorder arises only in association wi th intoxication or di scontinuation/withdrawal
states, whereas other sleep disorders may preced e the onset of substance use or occur during
times of sustained abstinence. As discontinuation/withdrawal states for some substances
can be protracted, onset of th e sleep disturbance can occur 4 weeks after cessation of sub-
stance use, and the disturbance may have feat ures atypical of other sleep disorders (e.g.,
atypical age at onset or course). The diagnosi s is not made if the sleep disturbance occurs
only during a delirium (Criterion D). The symptoms must cause clinically significant dis-
tress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning (Crite-
rion E). This diagnosis should be made instea d of a diagnosis of substance intoxication or
substance withdrawal only when the symptoms in Criterion A predominate in the clinical
picture and when the symptoms warrant  independent clinical attention. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
During periods of substance/medication use, intoxication, or withdrawal, individuals fre-
quently complain of dysphoric mood, includin g depression and anxiety, irritability, cog-
nitive impairment, inability to concentrate, and fatigue. 
Prominent and severe sleep disturbances can occur in association with intoxication
with the following classes of substances: alco hol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives,
hypnotics, or anxiolytics; st imulants (including cocaine); and other (or unknown) sub-
stances. Prominent and severe sleep disturbances can occur in association with withdrawal
from the following classes of substances: alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives,
hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulant (includi ng cocaine); tobacco; and other (or unknown)
substances. Some medications that invoke sl eep disturbances include adrenergic agonists
and antagonists, dopamine agonists and antagonists, cholinergic agonists and antagonists,
serotonergic agonists and antagonists,  antihistamines, and corticosteroids.
Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder 417
Alcohol. Alcohol-induced sleep disorder typica lly occurs as insomnia type. During
acute intoxication, alcohol produces an immedi ate sedative effect depending on dose, ac-
companied by increased stages 3 and 4 non– rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep and re-
duced rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Following these initial e ffects, there may be
increased wakefulness, restless sleep, and vivid and anxiety-laden dreams for the remain-
ing sleep period. In parallel, stages 3 and 4 sleep are reduced, and wakefulness and REM
sleep are increased. Alcohol can aggravate br eathing-related sleep disorder. With habitual
use, alcohol continues to show a short-lived sedati ve effect in the first half of the night, fol-
lowed by sleep continuity disruption in the second half. During alcohol withdrawal, there
is extremely disrupted sleep continuity, and an increased amount and intensity of REM
sleep, associated frequently with vivid drea ming, which in extreme form, constitutes part
of alcohol withdrawal delirium. After acut e withdrawal, chronic alcohol users may con-
tinue to complain of light, fragmented sleep for weeks to years associated with a persistent
deficit in slow-wave sleep.
Caffeine. Caffeine-induced sleep disorder produces insomnia in a dose-dependent man-
ner, with some individuals presenting with  daytime sleepiness related to withdrawal. 
Cannabis. Acute administration of cannabis may shorten sleep latency, though arous-
ing effects with increments in sleep latenc y also occur. Cannabis enhances slow-wave
sleep and suppresses REM sleep after acute administration. In chronic users, tolerance to
the sleep-inducing and slow-wave sleep–enha ncing effects develops. Upon withdrawal,
sleep difficulties and unpleasant dreams have  been reported lasting for several weeks.
Polysomnography studies demonstrate reduced slow-wave sleep and increased REM sleep
during this phase.
Opioids. Opioids may produce an increase in sleepiness and in subjective depth of sleep,
and reduced REM sleep, during acute short-te rm use. With continued administration, tol-
erance to the sedative effects of opioids de velops and there are co mplaints of insomnia.
Consistent with their respiratory depressant  effects, opioids exacerbate sleep apnea.
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances. Sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics (e.g.,
barbiturates, benzodiazepines receptor agon ists, meprobamate, glutethimide, methypry-
lon) have similar effects as opioids on sleep. During acute intoxication, sedative-hypnotic
drugs produce the expected incr ease in sleepiness and decrea se in wakefulness. Chronic
use (particularly of barbiturates and the ol der nonbarbiturate, no nbenzodiazepine drugs)
may cause tolerance with subsequent return  of insomnia. Daytime sleepiness may occur.
Sedative-hypnotic drugs can increase the frequency and severity of obstructive sleep ap-
nea events. Parasomnias are associated with us e of benzodiazepine receptor agonists, es-
pecially when these medications are taken at  higher doses and when they are combined
with other sedative drugs. Ab rupt discontinuation of chronic sedative, hypnotic, or anx-
iolytic use can lead to withdrawal but mo re commonly rebound insomnia, a condition of
an exacerbation of insomnia upon drug disc ontinuation for 1–2 days reported to occur
even with short-term use. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic drugs with short durations of
action are most likely to produce complain ts of rebound insomnia, whereas those with
longer durations of action are more often asso ciated with daytime sl eepiness. Any sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic drug can potentiall y cause daytime sedation, withdrawal, or re-
bound insomnia. 
Amphetamines and related substances and other stimulants. Sleep disorders induced
by amphetamine and related substances and other stimulants are characterized by insomnia
during intoxication and excessi ve sleepiness during withdrawal. During acute intoxication,
stimulants reduce the total amount of sleep, incr ease sleep latency and sleep continuity distur-
bances, and decrease REM sleep. Slow-wave slee p tends to  be reduced. During withdrawal
from chronic stimulant use, there is both pr olonged nocturnal sleep duration and excessive
daytime sleepiness. Multiple sleep latency te sts may show increased daytime sleepiness dur-
418 Sleep-Wake Disorders
ing the withdrawal phase. Drugs like 3,4- methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; “ec-
stasy”) and related substances lead to restless and disturbed sleep with in 48 hours of intake;
frequent use of these compounds is associated with persisting symptoms  of anxiety, depres-
sion, and sleep disturbances, even  during longer-term abstinence.
Tobacco. Chronic tobacco consumption is associat ed primarily with symptoms of insom-
nia, decreased slow-wave sleep with a reductio n of sleep efficiency, and increased daytime
sleepiness. Withdrawal from tobacco can lead  to impaired sleep. Individuals who smoke
heavily may experience regular nocturnal awakenings caused by tobacco craving.
Other or unknown substances/medications. Other substances/medications may pro-
duce sleep disturbances, particularly medications that affect the central or autonomic
nervous systems (e.g., adrenergic agonists an d antagonists, dopamine agonists and antag-
onists, cholinergic agonists an d antagonists, serotonergic agonists and antagonists, anti-
histamines, corticosteroids). 
Development and Course
Insomnia in children can be identified by eith er a parent or the child. Often the child has a
clear sleep disturbance associated with initiation of a medication but may not report
symptoms, although parents observe the slee p disturbances. The use of some illicit sub-
stances (e.g., cannabis, ecstasy) is prevalen t in adolescence and early adulthood. Insomnia
or any other sleep disturbance encountered in  this age group should  prompt careful con-
sideration of whether the sleep disturbance is due to consumption of these substances.
Help-seeking behavior for the sleep disturbance in these age groups is limited, and thus
corroborative report may be elic ited from a parent, caregiver, or teacher. Older individuals
take more medications and are at increased risk for developing a substance/medication-
induced sleep disorder. They may interpret sleep  disturbance as part of normal aging and
fail to report symptoms. Individuals with ma jor neurocognitive disorder (e.g., dementia)
are at risk for substance/me dication-induced sleep disord ers but may not report symp-
toms, making corroborative report from  caregiver(s) particularly important.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk and prognostic factors involved in subs tance abuse/dependence  or medication use
are normative for certain age groups. They are relevant for, and likely applicable to, the
type of sleep disturbance encountered (see th e chapter “Substance-Related and Addictive
Disorders” for descriptions of resp ective substance use disorders).
Temperamental. Substance use generally precipitates or accompanies insomnia in vul-
nerable individuals. Thus, presence of insomnia in response to stress or change in sleep en-
vironment or timing can represent a risk for developing substance/medication-induced
sleep disorder. A similar risk may be present for individuals with other sleep disorders
(e.g., individuals with hypersomnia who use stimulants).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The consumption of substances, including pres cribed medications, may depend in part on
cultural background and specif ic local drug regulations. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Gender-specific prevalences (i.e., females affected more than males at a ratio of about 2:1) exist
for patterns of consumption of some substances  (e.g., alcohol). The same amount and duration
of consumption of a given substance may lead to highly different sleep-related outcomes in
males and females based on, for example, gender -specific differences in hepatic functioning.
Substance/Medication-Induced Sleep Disorder 419
Diagnostic Markers
Each of the substance/medica tion-induced sleep disorders produces electroencephalo-
graphic sleep patterns that are as sociated with, but cannot be considered diagnostic of, other
disorders. The electroencephalo graphic sleep profile for each substance is related to the
stage of use, whether intake/intoxication, chronic use, or wi thdrawal following discontinu-
ation of the substance. All-night polysomnography can help define the severity of insomnia
complaints, while the multiple sleep latency test provides information about the severity of
daytime sleepiness. Monitoring of nocturnal respiration and periodic limb movements with
polysomnography may verify a substance’s im pact on nocturnal breathing and motor be-
havior. Sleep diaries for 2 weeks and actigraphy  are considered helpful in confirming the
presence of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder. Dr ug screening ca n be of use
when the individual is not aware or unwilling to relate information about substance intake.
Functional Consequences of 
Substance/Medication-I nduced Sleep Disorder
While there are many functional consequences  associated with sleep disorders, the only
unique consequence for substa nce/medication-induced sleep disorder is increased risk
for relapse. The degree of sleep disturbance during alcohol withdrawal (e.g., REM sleep
rebound predicts risk of relapse of drinking ). Monitoring of sleep quality and daytime
sleepiness during and after withdrawal may provide clinically meaningful information on
whether an individual is at increased risk for relapse.
Differential Diagnosis
Substance intoxication or substance withdrawal. Sleep disturbances are commonly en-
countered in the context of substance intoxi cation or substance discontinuation/with-
drawal. A diagnosis of substance/medication-induced sleep disorder should be made
instead of a diagnosis of substance intoxicati on or substance withdrawal only when the
sleep disturbance is predominant in the clinic al picture and is suffi ciently severe to war-
rant independent clinical attention. 
Delirium. If the substance/medication-induced sl eep disturbance occurs exclusively dur-
ing the course of a delirium, it is not diagnosed separately. 
Other sleep disorders. A substance/medication-induced sl eep disorder is distinguished
from another sleep disorder if a substance/medication is judged to be etiologically related to
the symptoms. A su bstance/medication-induc ed sleep disorder attributed to a prescribed
medication for a mental disorder or medical co ndition must have its onset while the individual
is receiving the medication or during disconti nuation, if there is a discontinuation/with-
drawal syndrome associated with the medication. Once treatment is discontinued, the sleep
disturbance will usually remit within days to  several weeks. If symptoms persist beyond
4 weeks, other causes for the sleep disturbanc e–related symptoms should be considered. Not
infrequently, individuals with another sleep di sorder use medications or drugs of abuse to
self-medicate their symptoms (e.g., alcohol fo r management of insomn ia). If the substance/
medication is judged to play a significant role in the exacerbation of the sleep disturbance, an
additional diagnosis of a substance/medicati on-induced sleep disorder may be warranted. 
Sleep disorder due to an other medical condition. Substance/medication-induced sleep
disorder and sleep disorder associated with  another medical condition may produce sim-
ilar symptoms of insomnia, daytime sleepiness, or a parasomnia. Many individuals with
other medical conditions that  cause sleep disturbance are treated with medications that
may also cause sleep disturbances. The chrono logy of symptoms is the most important fac-
tor in distinguishing between th ese two sources of sleep symptoms. Difficulties with sleep
that clearly preceded the use of any medication for treatment of a medical condition would
420 Sleep-Wake Disorders
suggest a diagnosis of sleep disorder associated with another medical condition. Con-
versely, sleep symptoms that appear only afte r the initiation of a particular medication/
substance suggest a substance/medication-ind uced sleep disorder. If the disturbance is
comorbid with another medical condition and is also exacerbated by substance use, both
diagnoses (i.e., sleep disorder associated with another medical condition and substance/
medication-induced sleep disorder) are given. When there is insuffici ent evidence to de-
termine whether the sleep distur bance is attributable to a substance/medication or to an-
other medical condition or is primary (i.e., not due to either a substance/medication or
another medical condition), a diagnosis of ot her specified sleep-wake disorder or unspec-
ified sleep-wake disorder is indicated.
Comorbidity
See the “Comorbidity” sections for other sleep  disorders in this chapter, including insom-
nia, hypersomnolence, centra l sleep apnea, sleep-related hypoventilation, and circadian
rhythm sleep-wake disorders, shift work type.
Relationship to Internat ional Classification of 
Sleep Disorders
The International Classifica tion of Sleep Disorders, 2nd Edition (ICSD-2), lists sleep disorders
“due to drug or substance” under their respective phenotypes (e.g., insomnia, hypersomnia).
Other Specified Insomnia Disorder
780.52 (G47.09)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of insomnia disorder
that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning predominate but do not meet th e full criteria for insomnia disorder or any
of the disorders in the sleep-wake disorders diagnostic class. The other specified insomnia dis-
order category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific
reason that the presentation does not meet the criteria for insomnia disorder or any specific
sleep-wake disorder. This is done by recording “other specified insomnia disorder” followed by
the specific reason (e.g., “brief insomnia disorder”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1.Brief insomnia disorder:  Duration is less than 3 months.
2.Restricted to no nrestorative sleep:  Predominant complaint is nonrestorative sleep
unaccompanied by other sleep symptoms such as difficulty falling asleep or remaining
asleep.
Unspecified Insomnia Disorder
780.52 (G47.00)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of insomnia disor-
der that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for insomnia dis-
order or any of the disorders in the sleep-wake disorders diagnostic class. The unspecified
Other Specified Hypersomnolence Disorder 421
insomnia disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify
the reason that the criteria are not met for insomnia disorder or a specific sleep-wake dis-
order, and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more
specific diagnosis.
Other Specified Hypersomnolence Disorder
780.54 (G47.19)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of hypersomno-
lence disorder that cause clinically signific ant distress or impairment in social, occupation-
al, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for
hypersomnolence disorder or any of the disorders in the sleep-wake disorders diagnostic
class. The other specified hypersomnolence disorder category is used in situations in
which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does
not meet the criteria for hypersomnolence diso rder or any specific sleep-wake disorder.
This is done by recording “other specified hypersomnolence disorder” followed by the spe-
cific reason (e.g., “brief-duration hyperso mnolence,” as in Kleine-Levin syndrome).
Unspecified Hypersomnolence Disorder
780.54 (G47.10)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of hypersomno-
lence disorder that cause clinically signific ant distress or impairment in social, occupation-
al, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for
hypersomnolence disorder or any of the disorders in the sleep-wake disorders diagnostic
class. The unspecified hypersomnolence disorder category is used in situations in which
the clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for hypersom-
nolence disorder or a specific sleep-wake disorder, and includes presentations in which
there is insufficient information to make a more specific diagnosis.
Other Specified Sleep-Wake Disorder
780.59 (G47.8)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a sleep-wake
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the sleep-wake disorders diagnostic class and do not qualify for a diagno-
sis of other specified insomnia disorder or  other specified hypersomnolence disorder. The
other specified sleep-wake disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician
chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presentation does not meet the
criteria for any specific sleep-wake disorder . This is done by recording “other specified
sleep-wake disorder” followed by the specific reason (e.g., “repeated arousals during rapid
eye movement sleep without polysomnography or history of Parkinson’s disease or other
synucleinopathy”).
422 Sleep-Wake Disorders
Unspecified Sleep-Wake Disorder
780.59 (G47.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a sleep-wake
disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or
other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria for any of
the disorders in the sleep-wake disorders di agnostic class and do not qualify for a diagno-
sis of unspecified insomnia disorder or unspecified hypersomnolence disorder. The un-
specified sleep-wake disorder category is used in situations in which the clinician chooses
not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific sleep-wake disorder,
and includes presentations in which there is insufficient information to make a more spe-
cific diagnosis.