481Substance-Related and
Addictive Disorders
The substance-related  disorders encompass 10 separate classes of drugs: alco-
hol; caffeine; cannabis; hallucinogens (with separate categories for phencyclidine [or sim-
ilarly acting arylcyclohexylamines] and ot her hallucinogens); inhalants; opioids;
sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics; stimul ants (amphetamine-type substances, cocaine,
and other stimulants); tobacco ; and other (or unknown) subs tances. These 10 classes are
not fully distinct. All drugs that are taken in excess have in common direct activation of
the brain reward system, which is involved in  the reinforcement of behaviors and the pro-
duction of memories. They produce such an in tense activation of the reward system that
normal activities may be neglected. Inst ead of achieving reward system activation
through adaptive behaviors, drugs of abuse directly activate the reward pathways. The
pharmacological mechanisms by which each class  of drugs produces reward are different,
but the drugs typically activate the system and produce feelings of pleasure, often re-
ferred to as a “high.” Furthe rmore, individuals with lower levels of self-control, which
may reflect impairments of brain inhibitory mechanisms, may be particularly predisposed
to develop substance use disord ers, suggesting that the root s of substance use disorders
for some persons can be seen in behaviors long before the onset of actual substance use
itself.
In addition to the substance-related disorders, this chapter also includes gambling dis-
order, reflecting evidence that gambling be haviors activate reward systems similar to
those activated by drugs of abuse and produce some behavi oral symptoms that appear
comparable to those produced by the substa nce use disorders. Other excessive behavioral
patterns, such as Internet gaming, have also been described, but the research on these and
other behavioral syndromes is less clear. Thus, groups of repetitive behaviors, which some
term behavioral addictions,  with such subcategories as “sex addiction,” “exercise addiction,”
or “shopping addiction,” are not included becaus e at this time there is insufficient peer-re-
viewed evidence to establish the diagnostic criteria and co urse descriptions needed to
identify these behaviors as mental disorders. 
The substance-related disorder s are divided into two groups: substance use disorders
and substance-induced disorders. The followi ng conditions may be classified as sub-
stance-induced: intoxication, withdrawal, an d other substance/medication-induced men-
tal disorders (psychotic disord ers, bipolar and related disorders, depressive disorders,
anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive and re lated disorders, sleep disorders, sexual dys-
functions, delirium, and neurocognitive disorders). 
The current section begins with a general di scussion of criteria sets for a substance
use disorder, substance intoxication and withdrawal, and other substance/medication-
induced mental disorders, at  least some of which are a pplicable across classes of sub-
stances. Reflecting some unique  aspects of the 10 substance classes relevant to this chapter,
the remainder of the chapter is  organized by the class of substance and describes their
unique aspects. To facilitate differential diagnosis, the text and criteria for the remaining
substance/medication-induced mental disorder s are included with disorders with which
they share phenomenology (e.g ., substance/medication-induced depressive disorder is in
the chapter “Depressive Disorder s”). The broad diagnostic cate gories associated with each
specific group of substances are shown in Table 1.
482 Substance-Related and Addictive DisordersTABLE 1 Diagnoses associated with substance class
 Psychotic 
disordersBipolar 
disordersDepres-
sive 
disordersAnxiety 
disordersObsessive-
compulsive 
and related 
disordersSleep 
disordersSexual 
dysfunc-
tions DeliriumNeuro-
cognitive 
disordersSubstance 
use 
disordersSub-
stance 
intoxi-
cationSub-
stance 
with-
drawal
Alcohol I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W/P X X X
Caffeine     I   I/W       X X
Cannabis I   I   I/W   I X X X
Hallucinogens
Phencyclidine I I I I     I X X  
Other hallucino-
gensI* I I I     I X X  
Inhalants I I  I        I I/P X X  
Opioids I/W W   I/W I/W I/W X X X
Sedatives, 
hypnotics, or 
anxiolyticsI/W I/W I/W W I/W I/W I/W I/W/P X X X
Stimulants** I I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I I X X X
Tobacco         W     X   X
Other (or 
unknown)I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W I/W/P X X X
Note.  X = The category is recognized in DSM-5.
I = The specifier “with onset during intoxication” may be noted for the category.
W = The specifier “with onset during with drawal” may be noted for the category.
I/W = Either “with onset during intoxication” or “with onset during withdrawal” may be noted for the category.
P = The disorder is persisting.
*Also hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (flashbacks).
**Includes amphetamine-type substances, coca ine, and other or unspecified stimulants.
Substance Use Disorders 483
Substance-Related Disorders
Substance Use Disorders
Features
The essential feature of a substance use disorder  is a cluster of cognitive, behavioral, and
physiological symptoms indicating that the individual continues using the substance de-
spite significant substance-related problems. As seen in Table 1, the diagnosis of a sub-
stance use disorder can be applied to all 10 cl asses included in this chapter except caffeine.
For certain classes some symptoms are less sa lient, and in a few instances not all symptoms
apply (e.g., withdrawal symptoms are not sp ecified for phencyclidin e use disorder, other
hallucinogen use disorder, or  inhalant use disorder). 
An important characteristic of substance use disorders is an underlying change in brain cir-
cuits that may persist beyond detoxification, part icularly in individuals with severe disorders.
The behavioral effect s of these brain changes may be exhibited in the repeated relapses and in-
tense drug craving when the individuals are exposed to drug-related stimuli. These persistent
drug effects may benefit from long-term approaches to treatment.
Overall, the diagnosis of a su bstance use disorder is based on a pathological pattern of
behaviors related to use of the substance. To as sist with organization, Criterion A criteria can
be considered to fit within overall groupings of impaired control,  social impairment,  risky use,
and pharmacological criteria.  Impaired control over substance use is the first criteria grouping
(Criteria 1–4). The individual may take the substance in larger amounts or over a longer pe-
riod than was originally intended (Criterion 1). The individual may express a persistent de-
sire to cut down or regulate substance use and may report multiple unsuccessful efforts to
decrease or discontinue use (Cri terion 2). The individual may sp end a great deal of time ob-
taining the substance, using the substance, or recovering from  its effects (Criterion 3). In
some instances of more severe substance use disorders, virtually all of the individual’s daily
activities revolve around  the substance. Craving (Criterion 4) is manifested by an intense de-
sire or urge for the drug that may occur at an y time but is more likely when in an environ-
ment where the drug previous ly was obtained or used. Cr aving has also been shown to
involve classical conditioning and is associated with activation of specific reward structures
in the brain. Craving is queried by asking if there has ever been a time when they had such
strong urges to take the drug th at they could not think of anythi ng else. Current craving is of-
ten used as a treatment outcome measure becaus e it may be a signal of impending relapse.
Social impairment is the second grouping of  criteria (Criteria 5–7) . Recurrent substance
use may result in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work, sc hool, or home (Crite-
rion 5). The individual may continue substanc e use despite having persistent or recurrent
social or interpersonal problems caused or ex acerbated by the effects of the substance (Cri-
terion 6). Important social, occupational, or re creational activities ma y be given up or re-
duced because of substance us e (Criterion 7). The individual may withdraw from family
activities and hobbies in order to use the substance. 
Risky use of the substance is the third grouping of criteria (Criteria 8–9). This may take
the form of recurrent substanc e use in situations in which it is physically hazardous (Cri-
terion 8). The individual may continue substance use despite knowledge of having a per-
sistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or
exacerbated by the substance (Criterion 9). The key issue in evaluating this criterion is not
the existence of the problem, but rather the in dividual’s failure to abstain from using the
substance despite the difficulty it is causing.
484 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Pharmacological criteria are the final grouping (Criteria 10 and 11). Tolerance (Crite-
rion 10) is signaled by requiring a markedly in creased dose of the substance to achieve the
desired effect or a markedly reduced effect when the usual dose is consumed. The degree
to which tolerance develops varies greatly across different individuals as well as across
substances and may involve a va riety of central nervous system  effects. For example, tol-
erance to respiratory depression and tolerance to sedating and motor coordination may
develop at different rates, depending on the substance. Tolerance ma y be difficult to de-
termine by history alone, and la boratory tests may be helpful (e .g., high blood levels of the
substance coupled with little evidence of into xication suggest that tolerance is likely). Tol-
erance must also be distinguished from indi vidual variability in the initial sensitivity to
the effects of particular substances. For exam ple, some first-time alcohol drinkers show
very little evidence of intoxication with thre e or four drinks, whereas others of similar
weight and drinking histories have slurred speech and incoordination. 
Withdrawal (Criterion 11) is a syndrome th at occurs when blood or tissue concentra-
tions of a substance decline in an individual who had maintained prolonged heavy use of
the substance. After developi ng withdrawal symptoms, the individual is likely to con-
sume the substance to relieve the symptoms . Withdrawal symptoms vary greatly across
the classes of substances, and separate criter ia sets for withdrawal are provided for the
drug classes. Marked and generally easily me asured physiological signs of withdrawal are
common with alcohol, opioids, and sedatives, hypnotics, and anxiolytics. Withdrawal
signs and symptoms with stimulants (amphetamines and cocaine), as well as tobacco and
cannabis, are often present but may be le ss apparent. Significant withdrawal has not been
documented in humans after repeated use of  phencyclidine, other hallucinogens, and in-
halants; therefore, this criterion is not incl uded for these substances. Neither tolerance nor
withdrawal is necessary for a diagnosis of a substance use disorder. However, for most
classes of substances, a past history of withdraw al is associated with a more severe clinical
course (i.e., an earlier onset of a substance us e disorder, higher levels of substance intake,
and a greater number of substance-related problems).
Symptoms of tolerance and withdrawal occurring during appropriate medical treat-
ment with prescribed medications (e.g., opio id analgesics, sedatives, stimulants) are spe-
cifically not counted when diagnosing a substance use disorder. The appearance of normal,
expected pharmacological  tolerance and withdrawal during the course of medical treat-
ment has been known to lead to an erroneou s diagnosis of “addiction” even when these
were the only symptoms pr esent. Indivi duals whose only symptoms are those that occur
as a result of medical treatment (i.e., tolera nce and withdrawal as part of medical care
when the medications are taken as prescribed) sh ould not receive a diagnosis solely on the
basis of these symptoms. However, prescripti on medications can be used inappropriately,
and a substance use disorder can be correc tly diagnosed when there are other symptoms
of compulsive, drug-seeking behavior.
Severity and Specifiers
Substance use disorders occur in a broad range of severity, from mild  to severe, with se-
verity based on the number of symptom criteria endorsed. As a general estimate of sever-
ity, a mild substance use disorder is suggested by the presence of two to three symptoms,
moderate  by four to five symptoms, and severe by six or more symptoms. Changing severity
across time is also reflected by reductions or increases in the fr equency and/or dose of
substance use, as assessed by the individual’s  own report, report of knowledgeable others,
clinician’s observations, and biological testing. The following course specifiers and descrip-
tive features specifiers are a lso available for substance use di sorders: “in early remission,”
“in sustained remission,” “on maintenance th erapy,” and “in a cont rolled environment.”
Definitions of each are provided within respective criteria sets. 
Substance Use Disorders 485
Recording Procedures for Substance Use Disorders
The clinician should use the code that applies to the class of substances but record the
name of the specific substance.  For example, the clinician should record 304.10 (F13.20)
moderate alprazolam use disorder  (rather than moderate seda tive, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
use disorder) or 305.70 (F15.10) mild methamphetamine use disorder (rather than mild
stimulant use disorder). For substances that do not fit into any of the classes (e.g., anabolic
steroids), the appropriate code for “other su bstance use disorder” should be used and the
specific substance indicated (e.g., 305.90 [F19.10] mild anabolic steroid use disorder). If the
substance taken by the individual is unknown, the code for the class “other (or unknown)”
should be used (e.g., 304.90 [F 19.20] severe unknown substance use disorder). If criteria
are met for more than one substance use diso rder, all should be diagnosed (e.g., 304.00
[F11.20] severe heroin use disorder; 304.20 [F14.20] moderate cocaine use disorder).
The appropriate ICD-10-CM code for a subs tance use disorder depends on whether
there is a comorbid substance-induced disorder  (including intoxication and withdrawal). In
the above example, the diagnostic code for moderate alprazolam use disorder, F13.20, re-
flects the absence of a comorbid alprazolam -induced mental disorder. Because ICD-10-CM
codes for substance-induced disorders indicate both the presence (or absence) and severity
of the substance use disorder, ICD-10-CM co des for substance use disorders can be used
only in the absence of a substance-induced di sorder. See the individu al substance-specific
sections for additional coding information.
Note that the word addiction  is not applied as a diagnostic term in this classification,
although it is in common usage in many countr ies to describe severe problems related to
compulsive and habitual use of substances. The more neutral term substance use disorder  is
used to describe the wide range of the disorder , from a mild form to a severe state of chron-
ically relapsing, compulsive drug taking. So me clinicians will choose to use the word ad-
diction  to describe more extreme presentations, but the word is omitted from the official
DSM-5 substance use disorder diagnostic term inology because of its uncertain definition
and its potentially negative connotation. 
Substance-Induced Disorders
The overall category of subs tance-induced disorders includ es intoxication, withdrawal,
and other substance/medication-induced ment al disorders (e.g., substance-induced psy-
chotic disorder, substance-in duced depressive disorder).
Substance Intoxication and Withdrawal
Criteria for substance intoxica tion are included within the substance-specific sections of
this chapter. The essential fe ature is the development of a reversible substance-specific
syndrome due to the recent ingestion of a subs tance (Criterion A). The clinically significant
problematic behavioral or psychological changes associated with intoxication (e.g., bellig-
erence, mood lability, impaired judgment) are attributable to the phy siological effects of
the substance on the central nervous system and develop during or shortly after use of the
substance (Criterion B). The symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition
and are not better explained by another mental  disorder (Criterion D). Substance intoxi-
cation is common among those with a substance use disorder but also occurs frequently in
individuals without a substance use disorder. This category does not apply to tobacco. 
The most common changes in intoxication involve disturba nces of perception, wake-
fulness, attention, thinking, judgment, psychomotor behavi or, and interpersonal behav-
ior. Short-term, or “acute,” intoxications may have different signs and symptoms than
486 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
sustained, or “chronic,” intoxications. For example, moderate cocaine doses may initially
produce gregariousness, but social withdrawal  may develop if such doses are frequently
repeated over days or weeks.
When used in the physiological sense, the term intoxication  is broader than substance
intoxication as defined here. Many substances may produce physiological or psychologi-
cal changes that are not necessarily problematic. For example, an individual with tachy-
cardia from substance use has a physiological effe ct, but if this is the only symptom in the
absence of problematic behavior, the diagnosis of intoxication would not apply. Intoxica-
tion may sometimes persist beyond the time when the substance is detectable in the body.
This may be due to enduring central nervous system effects,  the recovery of which takes
longer than the time for elimination of the su bstance. These longer-term effects of intoxi-
cation must be distinguished from withdraw al (i.e., symptoms initiated by a decline in
blood or tissue concentrat ions of a substance).
Criteria for substance withdrawal are included within the su bstance-specific sections of
this chapter. The essential feat ure is the development of a subs tance-specific problematic be-
havioral change, with physiologic al and cognitive concomitants, that is due to the cessation of,
or reduction in, heavy and prolonged substance use (Criterion A). The substance-specific syn-
drome causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, oc cupational, or other im-
portant areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms are not due to another medical
condition and are not better explained by anot her mental disorder (Criterion D). Withdrawal
is usually, but not always, as sociated with a substance use disorder. Most individuals with
withdrawal have an urge to re-administe r the substance to reduce the symptoms. 
Route of Administration and Speed of Substance Effects
Routes of administration that produce more rapid and efficient absorption into the blood-
stream (e.g., intravenous, smoking, intranasal “snorting”) te nd to result in a more intense
intoxication and an increased likelihood of an escalating pattern of substance use leading
to withdrawal. Similarly, rapi dly acting substances are more likely than slower-acting
substances to produce immediate intoxication. 
Duration of Effects
Within the same drug category, relatively sh ort-acting substances tend to have a higher
potential for the development of withdrawal th an do those with a longer duration of ac-
tion. However, longer-acting substances tend to have longer withdrawal duration. The
half-life of the substance parallels aspects of wi thdrawal: the longer the duration of action,
the longer the time between cessation and th e onset of withdrawal symptoms and the lon-
ger the withdrawal duration. In general, the longer the acute withdrawal period, the less
intense the syndrome tends to be.
Use of Multiple Substances
Substance intoxication and withdrawal often involve several substances used simultane-
ously or sequentially. In these cases, each diagnosis should be recorded separately.
Associated Laboratory Findings
Laboratory analyses of blood and urine samples can help determine recent use and the specific
substances involved. However, a positive laboratory test result do es not by itself indicate that
the individual has a pattern of substance use that  meets criteria for a substance-induced or sub-
stance use disorder, and a negative test result does not by  itself rule out a diagnosis.
Laboratory tests can be useful in identify ing withdrawal. If the individual presents
with withdrawal from an unknown substance, laboratory tests may help identify the sub-
stance and may also be helpful in differentiating withdrawal from other mental disorders.
Substance-Induced Disorders 487
In addition, normal functionin g in the presence of high bl ood levels of a substance sug-
gests considerable tolerance.
Development and Course
Individuals ages 18–24 years have relatively hi gh prevalence rates for the use of virtually
every substance. Intoxication is usually the initial substance-related disorder and often be-
gins in the teens. Withdrawal can occur at any age as long as the relevant drug has been
taken in sufficient doses over an extended period of time. 
Recording Procedures for Intoxication and Withdrawal
The clinician should use the code that applies to the class of substances but record the
name of the specific substance.  For example, the clinician sh ould record 292. 0 (F13.239) seco-
barbital withdrawal (rather than sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal) or 292.89
(F15.129) methamphetamine intoxication (rathe r than stimulant intoxication). Note that
the appropriate ICD-10-CM diagnostic code fo r intoxication depends on whether there is
a comorbid substance use diso rder. In this case, the F15.129 code for methamphetamine in-
dicates the presence of a comorbid mild methamphetamine use disorder. If there had been
no comorbid methamphetamine use disorder , the diagnostic code would have been
F15.929. ICD-10-CM coding rules require th at all withdrawal codes imply a comorbid
moderate to severe substance use disorder fo r that substance. In the above case, the code
for secobarbital withdrawal (F13.239) indicates the comorbid presence of a moderate to se-
vere secobarbital use disorder . See the coding note for the substance-specific intoxication
and withdrawal syndromes for the actual coding options.
For substances that do not fit into any of the cl asses (e.g., anabolic steroids), the appropriate
code for “other substance intoxication” should be used and the specific substance indicated
(e.g., 292.89 [F19.929] anabolic steroid intoxication). If the substance taken by the individual is
unknown, the code for the class “other (or unknown)” should be used (e.g., 292.89 [F19.929]
unknown substance intoxication). If there are sy mptoms or problems associated with a partic-
ular substance but criteria are not met for any of  the substance-specific disorders, the unspec-
ified category can be used (e.g., 292.9 [F12.99] unspecified cannabis-related disorder).
As noted above, the substance-related codes in ICD-10-CM combine the substance use dis-
order aspect of the clinical picture and the su bstance-induced aspect into a single combined
code. Thus, if both heroin withdrawal and modera te heroin use disorder are present, the single
code F11.23 is given to cover both presentati ons. In ICD-9-CM, separate diagnostic codes
(292.0 and 304.00) are given to indicate withdr awal and a moderate heroin use disorder, re-
spectively. See the individual substance-specific  sections for additional coding information. 
Substance/Medication-Induced Mental Disorders
The substance/medication-induced mental di sorders are potentially severe, usually tem-
porary, but sometimes persisti ng central nervous system (C NS) syndromes that develop
in the context of the effects of substances of abuse, medications, or several toxins. They are
distinguished from the substance use disorder s, in which a cluster of cognitive, behav-
ioral, and physiological symptoms contribute to the continued use of a substance despite
significant substance-related problems. The substance/medication-induced mental disor-
ders may be induced by the 10 classes of subs tances that produce su bstance use disorders,
or by a great variety of other medications used in medical treatment. Each substance-
induced mental disorder is desc ribed in the relevant chapter (e.g., “Depressive Disorders,”
“Neurocognitive Disorders”), an d therefore, only a brief description is offered here. All
substance/medication-induced disorders share common characte ristics. It is important to
recognize these common features to aid in th e detection of these disorders. These features
are described as follows:
488 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
A. The disorder represents a clinically signif icant symptomatic presentation of a relevant
mental disorder.
B. There is evidence from the history, physical  examination, or laboratory findings of
both of the following:
1. The disorder developed during or within  1 month of a substance intoxication or
withdrawal or taking a medication; and
2. The involved substance/medication is ca pable of producing th e mental disorder.
C. The disorder is not better explained by an in dependent mental disorder (i.e., one that is
not substance- or medication-induced). Such  evidence of an independent mental dis-
order could include the following:
1. The disorder preceded the onset of severe  intoxication or withdrawal or exposure
to the medication; or
2. The full mental disorder persisted for a substa ntial period of time (e.g., at least 1 month)
after the cessation of acute withdrawal or severe intoxication or taking the medica-
tion. This criterion does not apply to su bstance-induced neurocognitive disorders
or hallucinogen persisting perception disorder, which persist beyond the cessation
of acute intoxication or withdrawal.
D. The disorder does not occur exclusiv ely during the course of a delirium.
E. The disorder causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
Features
Some generalizations can be made  regarding the categories of substances capable of produc-
ing clinically relevant substance-induced mental disorders. In general, the more sedating
drugs (sedative, hypnotics, or anxiolytics, and alcohol) can produce prominent and clini-
cally significant depressive disorders during in toxication, while anxiet y conditions are likely
to be observed during withdrawal syndromes from these substances. Also, during intoxica-
tion, the more stimulating substances (e.g., am phetamines and cocaine) are likely to be as-
sociated with substance-induced psychoti c disorders and substance-induced anxiety
disorders, with substance-indu ced major depressive episodes observed during withdrawal.
Both the more sedating and mo re stimulating drugs are likely to produce significant but
temporary sleep and sexual dist urbances. An overview of the relationship between specific
categories of substanc es and specific psychiatric syndromes is presented in Table 1.
The medication-induced conditions includ e what are often idiosyncratic CNS reac-
tions or relatively extreme examples of side effects for a wide range of medications taken
for a variety of medical concerns. These includ e neurocognitive complications of anesthet-
ics, antihistamines, antihypertensives, and a variety of other medications and toxins (e.g.,
organophosphates, insecticides, carbon monoxi de), as described in the chapter on neuro-
cognitive disorders. Psychotic syndromes may be temporarily experienced in the context
of anticholinergic, cardiovascul ar, and steroid drugs, as well  as during use of stimulant-
like and depressant-like prescription or over-the-counter drugs. Temporary but severe
mood disturbances can be observed with a wi de range of medications, including steroids,
antihypertensives, disulfiram, and any prescription or over-the- counter depressant or
stimulant-like substances. A similar range of medications can be associated with tempo-
rary anxiety syndromes, sexual dysfunct ions, and conditions of disturbed sleep.
In general, to be considered a substance/ medication-induced mental disorder, there
must be evidence that the diso rder being observed is not likely to be better explained by an
independent mental condition. The latter are most likely to be seen if the mental disorder
was present before the severe intoxication or withdrawal or medication administration, or,
with the exception of several substance-induced persisting disorders listed in Table 1, con-
tinued more than 1 month after cessation of acute withdrawal, severe intoxication, or use
Substance-Induced Disorders 489
of the medications. When symptoms are only  observed during a delirium (e.g., alcohol
withdrawal delirium), the mental disorder sh ould be diagnosed as a delirium, and the
psychiatric syndrome occurring during the delirium should not also be diagnosed sepa-
rately, as many symptoms (including disturba nces in mood, anxiety, and reality testing)
are commonly seen during agitated, confused states. The features associated with each rel-
evant major mental disorder are similar whether observed with independent or sub-
stance/medication-induced mental disorders. However, individuals with substance/
medication-induced mental disorders are lik ely to also demonstrate the associated fea-
tures seen with the specific category of subs tance or medication, as listed in other subsec-
tions of this chapter. 
Development and Course
Substance-induced mental disord ers develop in the context of  intoxication or withdrawal
from substances of abuse, and medication-i nduced mental disorders are seen with pre-
scribed or over-the-counter medications that are taken at the suggest ed doses. Both condi-
tions are usually temporary and li kely to disappear with in 1 month or so of cessation of acute
withdrawal, severe intoxication, or use of th e medication. Exceptions to these generaliza-
tions occur for certain long-d uration substance-in duced disorders: substance-associated
neurocognitive disorders that relate to conditions such as alcohol- induced neurocognitive
disorder, inhalant-induced neurocognitive disord er, and sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-
induced neurocognitive disorder; and hallucinogen persisting perception disorder (“flash-
backs”; see the section “Hallucinogen-Related Disorders” later in this chapter). However,
most other substance/medication -induced mental disorders, re gardless of the severity of
the symptoms, are likely to impr ove relatively quickly with ab stinence and unlikely to re-
main clinically relevant for more than 1 month after complete cessation of use.
As is true of many consequences of heavy substance use, some individuals are more
and others less prone toward specific substance-induced disorders. Similar types of pre-
dispositions may make some individuals more likely to develop psychiatric side effects of
some types of medications, but not others. However, it is unclear whether individuals
with family histories or personal prior hist ories with independent psychiatric syndromes
are more likely to develop the induced synd rome once the consideration is made as to
whether the quantity and frequency of the substance was sufficient to lead to the devel-
opment of a substanc e-induced syndrome.
There are indications that the intake of su bstances of abuse or some medications with
psychiatric side effects in the context of a pree xisting mental disorder is likely to result in
an intensification of the preexisting indepe ndent syndrome. The risk for substance/med-
ication-induced mental disorders is likely to increase with both the quantity and the fre-
quency of consumption of  the relevant substance.
The symptom profiles for the substance/medication-induced mental disorders resem-
ble independent mental disorders. While the symptoms of substance/medication-in-
duced mental disorders can be identical to those of independent mental disorders (e.g.,
delusions, hallucinations, psychoses, major de pressive episodes, anxiety syndromes), and
although they can have the same severe conseq uences (e.g., suicide) , most induced mental
disorders are likely to improve in a matt er of days to weeks of abstinence.
The substance/medication-induced mental di sorders are an important part of the dif-
ferential diagnoses for the independent psychiatric conditions. The importance of recog-
nizing an induced mental disorder is similar to the relevance of identifying the possible
role of some medical conditions and medication reaction s before diagnosing an indepen-
dent mental disorder. Symptoms of substanc e- and medication-induced mental disorders
may be identical cross-sectionally to those of  independent mental disorders but have dif-
ferent treatments and prognoses from the independent condition. 
490 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Functional Consequences of Substance/Medication-
Induced Mental Disorders
The same consequences related to the relevant  independent mental disorder (e.g., suicide
attempts) are likely to apply to the substance/medi cation-induced mental disorders, but
these are likely to disappear within 1 month after abstinence. Similarly, the same func-
tional consequences associated with the relevant substance use disorder are likely to be seen
for the substance-indu ced mental disorders.
Recording Procedures fo r Substance/Medication-
Induced Mental Disorders
Coding notes and separate recording procedures for ICD-9-CM and ICD-10-CM codes for
other specific substance/medi cation-induced mental diso rders are provided in other
chapters of the manual with disorders with  which they share phenomenology (see the sub-
stance/medication-indu ced mental disorders in these chapters: “Schizophrenia Spectrum
and Other Psychotic Disorders,” “Bipolar and Related Disorders,” “Depressive Disor-
ders,” “Anxiety Disorders,” “Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders,” “Sleep-
Wake Disorders,” “Sexual Dysfunctions,” and “Neurocognitive Disorders”). Generally,
for ICD-9-CM, if a mental disorder is induced by a substance use disorder, a separate di-
agnostic code is given for the specific substance use disorder, in addition  to the code for the
substance/medication-induced mental disord er. For ICD-10-CM, a single code combines
the substance-induced mental disorder with the substance use disorder. A separate diag-
nosis of the comorbid substance use disorder is  not given, although the name and severity
of the specific substance use disorder (whe n present) are used when recording the sub-
stance/medication-induced mental disorder. ICD-10-CM codes are also provided for sit-
uations in which the substance/ medication-induced mental di sorder is not induced by a
substance use disorder (e.g., when a disorder is induced by one-time use of a substance or
medication). Additional  information needed to record the diagnostic name of the sub-
stance/medication-induce d mental disorder is provided in the sect ion “Recording Proce-
dures” for each substance/medication-induced mental disorder in its respective chapter.
Alcohol-Related Disorders
Alcohol Use Disorder
Alcohol Intoxication
Alcohol Withdrawal
Other Alcohol-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Alcohol-Related Disorder
Alcohol Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. A problematic pattern of alcohol use leading to clinically significant impairment or dis-
tress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. Alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control alcohol use.
Alcohol Use Disorder 491
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain alcohol, use alcohol,
or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use alcohol.
5. Recurrent alcohol use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work,
school, or home.
6. Continued alcohol use despite having persist ent or recurrent social or interpersonal
problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of alcohol.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreat ional activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of alcohol use.
8. Recurrent alcohol use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
9. Alcohol use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
physical or psychological problem that is  likely to have been caused or exacerbated
by alcohol.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of alcohol to achieve intoxication or de-
sired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of alcohol.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome fo r alcohol (refer to Criteria A and B of
the criteria set for alcohol withdrawal, pp. 499–500).
b. Alcohol (or a closely related substance, such as a benzodiazepine) is taken to
relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.
Specify if:
In early remission:  After full criteria for alcohol us e disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria for alcohol use disorder have been met for at least 3 months but for
less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire
or urge to use alcohol,” may be met).
In sustained remission:  After full criteria for alcohol  use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for alcohol use disorder have been met at any time during a
period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a
strong desire or urge to use alcohol,” may be met). 
Specify if:
In a controlle d environment:  This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to alcohol is restricted. 
Code based on current severity:  Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If an alcohol intoxication,
alcohol withdrawal, or another alcohol-induced m ental disorder is also present, do not use
the codes below for alcohol use disorder. Instead, the comorbid alcohol use disorder is
indicated in the 4th character of the alco hol-induced disorder code (see the coding note
for alcohol intoxication, alcohol withdrawal, or a specific alcohol-induced mental disorder).
For example, if there is comorbid alcohol intoxication and alcohol use disorder, only the
alcohol intoxication code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid
alcohol use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F10.129 for mild alcohol use disorder
with alcohol intoxication or F10.229 for a moderat e or severe alcohol use disorder with al-
cohol intoxication.
Specify current severity:
305.00 (F10.10) Mild:  Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
303.90 (F10.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
303.90 (F10.20) Severe:  Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
492 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” app lies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is
both in remission and in a controlled environm ent (i.e., in early remission in a controlled
environment or in sustained remission in a controlled environmen t). Examples of these
environments are closely supe rvised and substanc e-free jails, therapeutic communities,
and locked hospital units. 
Severity of the disorder is based on the number of diagno stic criteria endorsed. For a
given individual, changes in severity of alcoho l use disorder across ti me are also reflected
by reductions in the frequency (e.g., days of  use per month) and/or dose (e.g., number of
standard drinks consumed per day) of alcohol used, as assessed by the individual’s self-
report, report of knowledgeabl e others, clinician observations, and, when practical, bio-
logical testing (e.g., elevations in blood test s as described in the section “Diagnostic Mark-
ers” for this disorder).
Diagnostic Features
Alcohol use disorder is defined by a cluste r of behavioral and physical symptoms, which
can include withdrawal, tolerance, and cravin g. Alcohol withdrawal  is characterized by
withdrawal symptoms that de velop approximately 4–12 hours after the reduction of in-
take following prolonged, heavy alcohol inge stion. Because withdrawal from alcohol can
be unpleasant and intense, individuals may continue to consume alcohol despite adverse
consequences, often to avoid or to relieve withdrawal symptoms. Some withdrawal symp-
toms (e.g., sleep problems) can persist at lower intensities for months and can contribute to
relapse. Once a pattern of re petitive and intense use develo ps, individuals with alcohol
use disorder may devote substantial periods of time to obtaining and consuming alcoholic
beverages. 
Craving for alcohol is indicated by a strong desire to drink that makes it difficult to
think of anything else and that often results in the onset of drinking. School and job per-
formance may also suffer either from the aftereffects of drinking or from actual intoxica-
tion at school or on the job; child care or household responsibilities may be neglected; and
alcohol-related absences may o ccur from school or work. The individual may use alcohol
in physically hazardous circumstances (e.g., driving an automobile, swimming, operating
machinery while intoxicated). Finally, individu als with an alcohol use disorder may con-
tinue to consume alco hol despite the knowledge that continued consumption poses sig-
nificant physical (e.g., blackouts, liver disease ), psychological (e.g., depression), social, or
interpersonal problems (e.g., violent argume nts with spouse while intoxicated, child
abuse).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Alcohol use disorder is often associated wi th problems similar to  those associated with
other substances (e.g., cannabis ; cocaine; heroin; amphetamin es; sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics). Alcohol may be used to alleviate the unwanted effects of these other
substances or to substitute for them when they are not av ailable. Symptoms of conduct
problems, depression, anxiety, and insomnia frequently accompany heavy drinking and
sometimes precede it. 
Repeated intake of high doses of alcohol can affect nearly every organ system, espe-
cially the gastrointestinal tract, cardiovasc ular system, and the central and peripheral ner-
vous systems. Gastrointestinal effects includ e gastritis, stomach or duodenal ulcers, and,
in about 15% of individuals who use alcohol he avily, liver cirrhosis and/or pancreatitis.
There is also an increased rate of cancer of the esophagus, stomach, and other parts of the
gastrointestinal tract. One of the most comm only associated conditions is low-grade hy-
pertension. Cardiomyopathy and other myopat hies are less common but occur at an in-
Alcohol Use Disorder 493
creased rate among those who drink very he avily. These factors, along with marked
increases in levels of triglycerides and low- density lipoprotein cholesterol, contribute to
an elevated risk of heart disease. Periphe ral neuropathy may be evidenced by muscular
weakness, paresthesias, and decreased peripher al sensation. More persistent central ner-
vous system effects include cognitive deficits, severe memory impairment, and degener-
ative changes in the cerebellum. These effects are related to the direct effects of alcohol or
of trauma and to vitamin deficiencies (parti cularly of the B vitamins, including thiamine).
One devastating central nervous system e ffect is the relatively rare alcohol-induced per-
sisting amnestic disorder, or Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, in which the ability to encode
new memory is severely impaired. This condition would now be described within the chap-
ter “Neurocognitive Disorder s” and would be termed a substance/medicati on-induced neuro-
cognitive disorder.
Alcohol use disorder is an important contribu tor to suicide risk du ring severe intoxi-
cation and in the context of a temporary alco hol-induced depressive and bipolar disorder.
There is an increased rate of suicidal behavior as well as of completed suicide among in-
dividuals with the disorder.
Prevalence 
Alcohol use disorder is a common disorder. In  the United States, the 12-month prevalence
of alcohol use disorder is estimated to be 4.6% among 12- to 17-year-olds and 8.5% among
adults age 18 years and older in the United St ates. Rates of the disorder are greater among
adult men (12.4%) than among adult women (4 .9%). Twelve-month prevalence of alcohol
use disorder among adults decreases in midd le age, being greatest among individuals 18-
to 29-years-old (16.2%) and lowest among individuals age 65 years and older (1.5%).
Twelve-month prevalence varies markedly  across race/ethnic subgroups of the U.S.
population. For 12- to 17-year-olds, rates ar e greatest among Hispanics (6.0%) and Native
Americans and Alaska Natives (5.7%) relative to whites (5.0%), Afri can Americans (1.8%),
and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (1.6 %). In contrast, amon g adults, the 12-month
prevalence of alcohol use di sorder is clearly greater among Native Americans and Alaska
Natives (12.1%) than among whites (8.9%), Hispanics (7.9%), African Americans (6.9%),
and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (4.5%).
Development and Course
The first episode of alcohol into xication is likely to occur during the mid-teens. Alcohol-
related problems that do not m eet full criteria for a use disord er or isolated problems may
occur prior to age 20 years, but the age at onse t of an alcohol use disorder with two or more
of the criteria clustered together peaks in th e late teens or early to mid 20s. The large ma-
jority of individuals who develop alcohol-relate d disorders do so by their late 30s. The first
evidence of withdrawal is not likely to appear until after many other aspects of an alcohol
use disorder have developed. An  earlier onset of alcohol use disorder is observed in ado-
lescents with preexisting conduct problems and those with an earlier onset of intoxication.
Alcohol use disorder has a variable course th at is characterized by periods of remission
and relapse. A decision to stop drinking, often in response to a crisis, is likely to be followed
by a period of weeks or more of abstinence , which is often followed by limited periods of
controlled or nonproblematic drinking. However,  once alcohol intake resumes, it is highly
likely that consumption will rapidly escalate and that severe problems will once again
develop.
Alcohol use disorder is often erroneously pe rceived as an intractable condition, per-
haps based on the fact that individuals who present for treatment typically have a history
of many years of severe alco hol-related problems. However, these most severe cases rep-
resent only a small proportion of individuals with this disorder, and the typical individual
with the disorder has a much more promising prognosis. 
494 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Among adolescents, conduct disorder and repeated antisocial behavior often co-occur
with alcohol- and with other substance-relate d disorders. While most  individuals with al-
cohol use disorder develop the condition be fore age 40 years, perhaps 10% have later
onset. Age-related physical changes in older individuals result in increased brain suscep-
tibility to the depressant effect s of alcohol; decreased rates of  liver metabolism of a variety
of substances, including alcohol; and decrease d percentages of body water. These changes
can cause older people to develop more seve re intoxication and su bsequent problems at
lower levels of consumption. Al cohol-related problems in older people are also especially
likely to be associated with  other medical complications.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Environmental risk and prognostic factors may include cultural atti-
tudes toward drinking and intoxication, the availability of alcohol (including price),
acquired personal experiences with alcohol, and stress levels. Additional potential medi-
ators of how alcohol problems develop in predisposed individuals include heavier peer
substance use, exaggerated positive expectations  of the effects of alcohol, and suboptimal
ways of coping with stress. 
Genetic and physiological. Alcohol use disorder runs in families, with 40%–60% of the
variance of risk explained by genetic influenc es. The rate of this condition is three to four
times higher in close relatives of individuals with alcohol use disorder, with values highest
for individuals with a greater nu mber of affected relatives, closer genetic relationships to
the affected person, and higher severity of the alcohol-related problems in those relatives.
A significantly higher rate of alcohol use disorders exists in the monozygotic twin than in
the dizygotic twin of an individual with the condition. A three- to fourfold increase in risk
has been observed in children of individuals with alcohol use disorder, even when these
children were given up for adoption at birth and raised by adoptive parents who did not
have the disorder.
Recent advances in our understanding of  genes that operate through intermediate
characteristics (or phe notypes) to affect the risk of alco hol use disorder can help to identify
individuals who might be at pa rticularly low or high risk for alcohol use disorder. Among
the low-risk phenotypes are the acute alcohol-related skin flush (seen most prominently in
Asians). High vulnerability is associated with  preexisting schizophrenia or bipolar disor-
der, as well as impulsivity (producing enha nced rates of all substance use disorders and
gambling disorder), and a high risk specifically for alcohol use disorder is associated with
a low level of response (low sensitivity) to alcohol. A number of gene variations may ac-
count for low response to alcohol or modulate the dopamine reward systems; it is impor-
tant to note, however, that any one gene variat ion is likely to explain only 1%–2% of the risk
for these disorders.
Course modifiers. In general, high levels of impulsivity are associated with an earlier
onset and more severe alcohol use disorder. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
In most cultures, alcohol is the most frequently used intoxicating substance and contrib-
utes to considerable morbidity and mortality. An estimate d 3.8% of all global deaths and
4.6% of global disability-adjusted life-years are attribut able to alcohol. In the United States,
80% of adults (age 18 years and older) have co nsumed alcohol at some  time in their lives,
and 65% are current drinkers (last 12 months).  An estimated 3.6% of the world population
(15–64 years old) has a current (12-month) alcohol use disorder, with a lower prevalence
(1.1%) found in the Afri can region, a higher rate  (5.2%) found in the Am erican region (North,
South, and Central America and the Caribbean) , and the highest rate (10.9%) found in the
Eastern Europe region.
Alcohol Use Disorder 495
Polymorphisms of genes for the alcohol- metabolizing enzymes alcohol dehydroge-
nase and aldehyde dehydrogenase are most ofte n seen in Asians and affect the response to
alcohol. When consuming alcoho l, individuals with these gene variations can experience a
flushed face and palpitations, reactions that ca n be so severe as to lim it or preclude future
alcohol consumption and diminish the risk fo r alcohol use disorder. These gene variations
are seen in as many as 40% of Japanese, Chinese, Korean, and related groups worldwide
and are related to lower risks for the disorder.
Despite small variations regarding individual criterion items, the diagnostic criteria
perform equally well across mo st race/ethnicity groups.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males have higher rates of drinking and rela ted disorders than fema les. However, because
females generally weigh less than males, have more fat and less water in their bodies, and
metabolize less alcohol in their esophagus and stomach, they are likely to develop higher
blood alcohol levels per drink than males. Females who drink heavily may also be more
vulnerable than males to some of the physical consequences associated with alcohol, in-
cluding liver disease.
Diagnostic Markers
Individuals whose heavier drinking places them  at elevated risk for alcohol use disorder
can be identified both through standardized qu estionnaires and by elevations in blood test
results likely to be seen with regular heavie r drinking. These measures do not establish a
diagnosis of an alcohol-related disorder but can be useful in highlighting individuals for
whom more information should be gathered. Th e most direct test available to measure al-
cohol consumption cross-sectionally is blood alcohol concentration,  which can also be used to
judge tolerance to alcohol. For example, an individual with a conc entration of 150 mg of
ethanol per deciliter (dL) of blood who does not show signs of intoxication can be pre-
sumed to have acquired at le ast some degree of tolerance to  alcohol. At 200 mg/dL, most
nontolerant individuals demons trate severe intoxication. 
Regarding laboratory tests, one sensitive la boratory indicator of heavy drinking is a
modest elevation or high-normal levels (>35  units) of gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT).
This may be the only laboratory  finding. At least 70% of indi viduals with a high GGT level
are persistent heavy drinkers (i.e., consuming ei ght or more drinks daily on a regular basis).
A second test with comparable or even higher levels of sensitivity and specificity is carbo-
hydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT), with levels of  20 units or higher us eful in identifying in-
dividuals who regularly consum e eight or more drinks daily. Since both GGT and CDT
levels return toward normal within days to weeks of stopping drinking, both state markers
may be useful in monitoring abstinence, espe cially when the clinician observes increases,
rather than decreases, in thes e values over time—a finding indicating that the person is
likely to have returned to heavy drinking. The combination of tests for CDT and GGT may
have even higher levels of sens itivity and specificity than eith er test used alone. Additional
useful tests include the mean corpuscular volume (MCV), whic h may be elevated to high-
normal values in individuals who drink heavily— a change that is due to the direct toxic ef-
fects of alcohol on erythropoiesis. Although the MCV can be used  to help identify those who
drink heavily, it is a poor method of monitori ng abstinence because of the long half-life of
red blood cells. Liver function tests (e.g., alanine aminotransfe rase [ALT] and alkaline phos-
phatase) can reveal liver injury that is a co nsequence of heavy drinking. Other potential
markers of heavy drinking that are more nons pecific for alcohol but can help the clinician
think of the possible effects of alcohol include elevations in blood levels or lipids (e.g., tri-
glycerides and high-density li poprotein cholesterol) and high -normal levels of uric acid.
Additional diagnostic markers relate to sign s and symptoms that reflect the consequences
often associated with persistent heavy drinki ng. For example, dyspepsia, nausea, and bloat-
496 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
ing can accompany gastritis, and hepatomegaly, esophageal varices, and hemorrhoids may
reflect alcohol-induced changes in the liver. Other physical signs of heavy drinking include
tremor, unsteady gait, insomnia, and erectile dy sfunction. Males with chronic alcohol use dis-
order may exhibit decreased testicular size and feminizing effects associated with reduced
testosterone levels. Repeated he avy drinking in females is associated with menstrual irregu-
larities and, during pregnancy, spontaneous abortion and fetal alcohol syndrome. Individu-
als with preexisting histories of epilepsy or se vere head trauma are more likely to develop
alcohol-related seizures. Alcohol withdrawal ma y be associated with nausea, vomiting, gas-
tritis, hematemesis, dry mouth, puffy blot chy complexion, and mild peripheral edema.
Functional Consequences of Alcohol Use Disorder
The diagnostic features of alcohol use disord er highlight major area s of life functioning
likely to be impaired. These include driving and operating machinery, school and work,
interpersonal relationships and communication, and health. Alcoho l-related disorders
contribute to absenteeism from work, job-re lated accidents, and low employee productiv-
ity. Rates are elevated in homeless individual s, perhaps reflecting a downward spiral in
social and occupational functioning, although most individuals with alcohol use disorder
continue to live with their families and function within their jobs.
Alcohol use disorder is associated with a significant increase in the risk of accidents, vi-
olence, and suicide. It is estimated that one in  five intensive care un it admissions in some
urban hospitals is related to al cohol and that 40% of individu als in the United States ex-
perience an alcohol-related adverse event at so me time in their lives, with alcohol account-
ing for up to 55% of fatal driving events. Severe alcohol use disorder, especially in
individuals with antisocial personality disorder, is associated with the commission of
criminal acts, including homicide. Severe problematic alcohol use also contributes to dis-
inhibition and feelings of sadness and irritab ility, which contribute to suicide attempts and
completed suicides.
Unanticipated alcohol withdrawal in hospitalized individuals for whom a diagnosis of
alcohol use disorder has been overlooked can a dd to the risks and costs of hospitalization
and to time spent in the hospital.
Differential Diagnosis
Nonpathological use of alcohol. The key element of alcohol use disorder is the use of
heavy doses of alcohol with resulting repeated and significant distress or impaired func-
tioning. While most drinkers sometimes consume enough alcohol to feel intoxicated, only
a minority (less than 20%) ever develop al cohol use disorder. Therefore, drinking, even
daily, in low doses and occasional intoxication do not by themselves make this diagnosis.
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. The signs and symptoms of alcohol use
disorder are similar to those seen in sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. The two
must be distinguished, however, because the c ourse may be different, especially in rela-
tion to medical problems.
Conduct disorder in childhood and adult antisocial personality disorder. Alcohol use
disorder, along with other substa nce use disorders, is seen in the majority of individuals
with antisocial personality and preexisting conduct disorder. Because these diagnoses are
associated with an early onset of alcohol use disorder as well as a worse prognosis, it is im-
portant to establish both conditions.
Comorbidity
Bipolar disorders, schizophrenia, and antisocial  personality disorder are associated with a
markedly increased rate of alcohol use disorder , and several anxiety and depressive disorders
Alcohol Intoxication 497
may relate to alcohol use disorder as well. At least a part of the reported association between
depression and moderate to severe alcohol use disorder may be attributable to temporary, al-
cohol-induced comorbid depressive symptoms re sulting from the acute effects of intoxication
or withdrawal. Severe, repeated  alcohol intoxication may also suppress immune mechanisms
and predispose individuals to infections and increase the risk for cancers.
Alcohol Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent ingestion of alcohol.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., inappropri-
ate sexual or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impaired judgment) that developed
during, or shortly after, alcohol ingestion.
C. One (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly after,
alcohol use:
1. Slurred speech.
2. Incoordination.
3. Unsteady gait.
4. Nystagmus.
5. Impairment in attention or memory.
6. Stupor or coma.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not better
explained by another mental disorder, in cluding intoxication with another substance.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 303.00.  The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
there is a comorbid alcohol use disorder. If a mild alcohol use disorder is comorbid, the
ICD-10-CM code is F10.129,  and if a moderate or severe alcohol use disorder is comorbid,
the ICD-10-CM code is F10.229.  If there is no comorbid alcohol use disorder, then the
ICD-10-CM code is F10.929.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of alcohol intoxication is the presence of  clinically significant problematic
behavioral or psychological chan ges (e.g., inappropriate sexual  or aggressive behavior, mood
lability, impaired judgment, impaired social or occupational functioning) that develop during,
or shortly after, alcohol ingestion (Criterion B). These changes are accompanied by evidence of
impaired functioning and ju dgment and, if intoxication is inte nse, can result in a life-threaten-
ing coma. The symptoms must not be attributable  to another medical co ndition (e.g., diabetic
ketoacidosis), are not a reflection  of conditions such as delirium,  and are not related to intoxi-
cation with other depressant drugs (e.g., benzodiazepines) (Crite rion D). The levels of incoor-
dination can interfere with driving abilities and performance of usual activities to the point of
causing accidents. Evidence of alcohol use can be  obtained by smelling alcohol on the individ-
ual’s breath, eliciting a history from the indivi dual or another observer, and, when needed,
having the individual provide breath, blood , or urine samples for toxicology analyses.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Alcohol intoxication is sometimes associated with amnesia for the events that occurred
during the course of the intoxication (“bl ackouts”). This phenomenon may be related to
the presence of a high blood alcohol level an d, perhaps, to the rapidity with which this
level is reached. During even mild alcohol in toxication, different symptoms are likely to be
498 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
observed at different time points. Evidence of mild intoxication with alcohol can be seen in
most individuals after approximately two drin ks (each standard drink is approximately
10–12 grams of ethanol and raises the blood alcohol concentration approximately 20 mg/
dL). Early in the drinking period, when blood alcohol levels are rising, symptoms often
include talkativeness, a sensation of well-being, and a bright, expansive mood. Later, es-
pecially when blood alcohol levels are falling,  the individual is likely to become progres-
sively more depressed,  withdrawn, and cognitively impair ed. At very high blood alcohol
levels (e.g., 200–300 mg/dL), an individual who has not developed tolerance for alcohol is
likely to fall asleep and enter a first stage of anesthesia. Higher blood alcohol levels (e.g., in
excess of 300–400 mg/dL) can cause inhibition of respiration and pulse and even death in
nontolerant individuals. The duration of in toxication depends on how much alcohol was
consumed over what period of time. In general, the body is able to metabolize approxi-
mately one drink per hour, so that the blood alcohol level generally decreases at a rate of
15–20 mg/dL per hour. Signs and symptoms of in toxication are likely to be more intense
when the blood alcohol level is rising than when it is falling.
Alcohol intoxication is an important contri butor to suicidal behavior. There appears to
be an increased rate of suic idal behavior, as well as of co mpleted suicide, among persons
intoxicated by alcohol. 
Prevalence 
The large majority of alcohol consumers are likely to have been intoxicated to some degree at
some point in their lives. For ex ample, in 2010, 44% of 12th-grad e students admitted to having
been “drunk in the past year,” with more than 70% of college students reporting the same.
Development and Course
Intoxication usually occurs as an episode usua lly developing over minutes to hours and typi-
cally lasting several hours. In th e United States, the average age at first intoxication is approx-
imately 15 years, with the highest prevalence at approximately 18–25 years. Frequency and
intensity usually decrease with further advancin g age. The earlier the onset of regular intoxi-
cation, the greater the likelihood the individual will go on to develop alcohol use disorder.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Episodes of alcohol intoxication increase with personality characteris-
tics of sensation seeking and impulsivity.
Environmental. Episodes of alcohol intoxication increase with a heavy drinking envi-
ronment.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The major issues parallel the cultural differ ences regarding the use of alcohol overall.
Thus, college fraternities and sororities ma y encourage alcohol intoxication. This condi-
tion is also frequent on certain dates of cultur al significance (e.g., New Year’s Eve) and, for
some subgroups, during specif ic events (e.g., wakes following funerals). Other subgroups
encourage drinking at religious celebrations (e.g., Jewish and Catholic holidays), while
still others strongly discourage all drinking or intoxication (e.g., some religious groups,
such as Mormons, fundamenta list Christians, and Muslims).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Historically, in many Western societies, ac ceptance of drinking and drunkenness is more
tolerated for males, but such gender differences may be much less prominent in recent
years, especially during adolescence and young adulthood.
Alcohol Withdrawal 499
Diagnostic Markers
Intoxication is usually established by observing an individual’s behavior and smelling alcohol
on the breath. The degree of into xication increases with an individual’s blood or breath alcohol
level and with the ingestion of other substanc es, especially those with sedating effects.
Functional Consequences of Alcohol Intoxication
Alcohol intoxication contributes to the more than 30,000 alcohol-related drinking deaths in
the United States each year. In addition, intoxication with this drug contributes to huge
costs associated with drunk driving, lost time from school or work, as well as interpersonal
arguments and physical fights.
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions. Several medical (e.g., diabetic acidosis) and neurological condi-
tions (e.g., cerebellar ataxia, multiple sclerosis) can temporarily resemble alcohol intoxication. 
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication. Intoxication with se dative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic drugs or with other sedating subs tances (e.g., antihistam ines, anticholinergic
drugs) can be mistaken for alcohol intoxicati on. The differential requires observing alco-
hol on the breath, measuring blood or breath alcohol levels , ordering a medical workup,
and gathering a good history. The signs and symptoms of sedative-hypnotic intoxication
are very similar to those observed with alco hol and include similar problematic behavioral
or psychological changes. These changes are accompanied by evidence of impaired func-
tioning and judgment—which, if intense, can result in a life-threat ening coma—and levels
of incoordination that can interfere with driving abilities and with performing usual
activities. However, there is no smell as there is with alcohol, but there is likely to be evi-
dence of misuse of the depressant drug in the blood or urine toxicology analyses.
Comorbidity
Alcohol intoxication may occu r comorbidly with other subs tance intoxication, especially
in individuals with conduct disorder or antisocial personality disorder.
Alcohol Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Cessation of (or reduction in) alcohol use that has been heavy and prolonged.
B. Two (or more) of the following, developing within several hours to a few days after the
cessation of (or reduction in) alcohol use described in Criterion A:
1. Autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., sweating or pulse rate greater than 100 bpm).
2. Increased hand tremor.
3. Insomnia.
4. Nausea or vomiting.
5. Transient visual, tactile, or auditory hallucinations or illusions.
6. Psychomotor agitation.
7. Anxiety.
8. Generalized tonic-clonic seizures.
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
500 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from
another substance.
Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances:  This specifier applies in the rare instance when hal-
lucinations (usually visual or tactile) occur with intact reality testing, or auditory, visual,
or tactile illusions occur in the absence of a delirium.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 291.81. The ICD-10-CM code for alcohol withdrawal
without perceptual disturbances is F10.239,  and the ICD-10-CM code for alcohol withdrawal
with perceptual disturbances is F10.232.  Note that the ICD-10-CM code indicates the comor-
bid presence of a moderate or severe alcohol use disorder, reflecting the fact that alcohol with-
drawal can only occur in the presence of a moderate or severe alcohol use disorder. It is not
permissible to code a comorbid mild alcohol use disorder with alcohol withdrawal.
Specifiers
When hallucinations occur in the absence of delirium (i.e., in a clea r sensorium), a diagno-
sis of substance/medication-induced ps ychotic disorder should be considered.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of alcoho l withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops within several hours to a few days after the cessation of (or re-
duction in) heavy and prolon ged alcohol use (Criteria A and B). The withdrawal syn-
drome includes two or more of the sympto ms reflecting autonomic hyperactivity and
anxiety listed in Criterion B, along with gastrointestinal symptoms.
Withdrawal symptoms cause clinically signific ant distress or impairment in social, oc-
cupational, or other important areas of functi oning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not
be attributable to another me dical condition and are not be tter explained by  another men-
tal disorder (e.g., generalized anxiety diso rder), including intoxication or withdrawal
from another substance (e.g., sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal) (Criterion D).
Symptoms can be relieved by administering alcohol or benzodiazepines (e.g., diazepam).
The withdrawal symptoms typically begin when blood concentrations of alcohol decline
sharply (i.e., within 4–12 hours) after alcohol us e has been stopped or re duced. Reflecting the
relatively fast metabolism of alcohol, symptoms  of alcohol withdrawal usually peak in inten-
sity during the second day of abstinence and ar e likely to improve markedly by the fourth or
fifth day. Following acute withdrawal, however, symptoms of anxiety, insomnia, and auto-
nomic dysfunction may persist for up to 3–6 months at lower levels of intensity.
Fewer than 10% of individuals who develop alcohol withdrawal will ever develop dra-
matic symptoms (e.g., severe autonomic hypera ctivity, tremors, alcohol withdrawal delir-
ium). Tonic-clonic seizures occur in fewer than 3% of individuals.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Although confusion and changes in consciousness are not core criteria for alcohol with-
drawal, alcohol withdrawal delirium (see “De lirium” in the chapte r “Neurocognitive Dis-
orders”) may occur in the context of withdrawal . As is true for any agitated, confused state,
regardless of the cause, in addition to a disturbance of cons ciousness and cognition, with-
drawal delirium can include visual, tactile, or (rarely) auditory hallucinations (delirium tre-
mens). When alcohol withdrawal delirium develo ps, it is likely that a clinically relevant
medical condition may be present (e.g., liver fa ilure, pneumonia, gastrointestinal bleeding,
sequelae of head trauma, hypoglycemia, an electrolyte imbalance, postoperative status).
Alcohol Withdrawal 501
Prevalence
It is estimated that approximately 50% of mi ddle-class, highly functional individuals with
alcohol use disorder have ev er experienced a full alcohol withdrawal syndrome. Among
individuals with alcohol use disorder who are hospitalized or homeless, the rate of al-
cohol withdrawal may be greater than 80%. Less than 10% of individuals in withdrawal
ever demonstrate alcoho l withdrawal delirium or withdrawal seizures. 
Development and Course
Acute alcohol withdrawal occurs as an episode usually lasting 4–5 days and only after
extended periods of heavy drinking. Withdrawal  is relatively rare in individuals younger
than 30 years, and the risk and seve rity increase with increasing age.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. The probability of developing alco hol withdrawal increases with the
quantity and frequency of alcohol consumptio n. Most individuals with this condition are
drinking daily, consuming large amounts (appr oximately more than eight drinks per day)
for multiple days. However, there are large inter-individual differences, with enhanced
risks for individuals with concurrent medical conditions, those with family histories of al-
cohol withdrawal (i.e., a gene tic component), those with pr ior withdrawals, and individ-
uals who consume sedative, hy pnotic, or anxiolytic drugs.
Diagnostic Markers
Autonomic hyperactivity in the context of moderately high but falling blood alcohol levels
and a history of prolonged heavy drinking in dicate a likelihood of alcohol withdrawal.
Functional Consequences  of Alcohol Withdrawal
Symptoms of withdrawal may serve to perpet uate drinking behaviors and contribute to
relapse, resulting in persistently impaired so cial and occupational functioning. Symptoms
requiring medically supervised detoxification result in hospital utilization and loss of
work productivity. Overall, the presence of withdrawal is associated with greater func-
tional impairment and poor prognosis. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical conditions. The symptoms of alcohol withdrawal can also be mimicked
by some medical conditions (e.g., hypoglycemia and diabetic ketoacidosis). Essential
tremor, a disorder that frequently runs in  families, may erroneou sly suggest the tremu-
lousness associated with alcohol withdrawal. 
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic with-
drawal produces a syndrome very sim ilar to that of alcohol withdrawal.
Comorbidity
Withdrawal is more likely to occur with heavie r alcohol intake, and that might be most of-
ten observed in individuals with conduct di sorder and antisocial personality disorder.
Withdrawal states are also more severe in ol der individuals, individuals who are also de-
pendent on other depressant drugs (sedativ e-hypnotics), and individuals who have had
more alcohol withdrawal experiences in the past.
502 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Other Alcohol-Induced Disorders
The following alcohol-induced disorders are desc ribed in other chapters of the manual with
disorders with which they share phenomenol ogy (see the substance/medication-induced
mental disorders in these chapters): alcohol-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizophrenia Spec-
trum and Other Psychotic Disorders”); alcoho l-induced bipolar diso rder (“Bipolar and
Related Disorders”); alcohol-induced depressive  disorder (“Depressive  Disorders”); alcohol-
induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiety Disorders”); alcohol-induced sl eep disorder (“Sleep-
Wake Disorders”); alcohol-induced sexual dysfunction (“Sexual Dysfunctions”); and alcohol-
induced major or mild neurocognitive disorder (“Neurocognitive Disorders”). For alcohol
intoxication delirium an d alcohol withdrawal delirium, see th e criteria and discussion of de-
lirium in the chapter “Neurocognitive Disorder s.” These alcohol-induced disorders are diag-
nosed instead of alcohol intoxication or alcohol withdrawal only when the symptoms are
sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention.
Features
The symptom profiles for an al cohol-induced condition resemble independent mental disor-
ders as described elsewhere in  DSM-5. However, the alcohol- induced disorder is temporary
and observed after severe intoxication with an d/or withdrawal from alcohol. While the symp-
toms can be identical to those of independent mental disorders (e.g., psychoses, major depres-
sive disorder), and while they can have the same  severe consequences (e.g., suicide attempts),
alcohol-induced conditions are li kely to improve without formal treatment in a matter of days
to weeks after cessation of severe intoxication and/or withdrawal. 
Each alcohol-induced mental disorder is listed  in the relevant diagnostic section and there-
fore only a brief description is offered here. Alcohol-induced disorder s must have developed
in the context of severe intoxication and/or wi thdrawal from the substance capable of produc-
ing the mental disorder. In addition, there must  be evidence that the disorder being observed
is not likely to be better expl ained by another non-alcohol-indu ced mental disorder. The latter
is likely to occur if the mental  disorder was present before the severe intoxication or with-
drawal, or continued more than 1 month after the cessation of severe intoxication and/or with-
drawal. When symptoms are observed only during a delirium, they should be considered part
of the delirium and not diagnosed separately, as  many symptoms (including disturbances in
mood, anxiety, and reality testin g) are commonly seen during ag itated, confused states. The al-
cohol-induced disorder must be clinically relevant, causing significant levels of distress or sig-
nificant functional impairment. Finally, there are indications that the intake of substances of
abuse in the context of a preexisting mental disorder are likely to result in an intensification of
the preexisting independent syndrome. 
The features associated with each relevant  major mental disorder (e.g., psychotic epi-
sodes, major depressive disorder) are similar whether observed with an independent or an
alcohol-induced condition. However, indivi duals with alcohol-induced disorders are
likely to also demonstrate the associated feat ures seen with an alcohol use disorder, as
listed in the subsections of this chapter.
Rates of alcohol-induced diso rders vary somewhat by diag nostic category. For exam-
ple, the lifetime risk for major depressive epis odes in individuals with alcohol use disorder
is approximately 40%, but only about one-third to one-half of these represent independent
major depressive syndromes observed outside the context of intoxication. Similar rates of
alcohol-induced sleep and anxiet y conditions are likely, but alcohol-induced psychotic ep-
isodes are fairly rare. 
Development and Course
Once present, the symptoms of an alcohol-in duced condition are likely to remain clinically
relevant as long as the individual continues to  experience severe intoxication and/or with-
Unspecified Alcohol-Related Disorder 503
drawal. While the symptoms are identical to those of independent mental disorders (e.g.,
psychoses, major depressive disorder), and while they can have the same severe conse-
quences (e.g., suicide attempts), all alcohol-induced syndromes other than alcohol-
induced neurocognitive disord er, amnestic confabulatory ty pe (alcohol-induced persist-
ing amnestic disorder), regardless of the se verity of the symptoms, are likely to improve
relatively quickly and unlikely to remain clin ically relevant for more than 1 month after
cessation of severe intoxication and/or withdrawal. 
The alcohol-induced disorders are an important part of the differential diagnoses for
the independent mental conditions. Independ ent schizophrenia, major depressive disor-
der, bipolar disorder, and anxiety disorders, su ch as panic disorder, are likely to be asso-
ciated with much longer-lasting periods of symptoms and often require longer-term
medications to optimize the probability of improvement or recovery . The alcohol-induced
conditions, on the other hand, are likely to be much shorter in duration and disappear
within several days to 1 month after cessatio n of severe intoxication and/or withdrawal,
even without psychotropic medications. 
The importance of recognizing an alcohol- induced disorder is similar to the relevance
of identifying the possible role of some endo crine conditions and medication reactions be-
fore diagnosing an independent mental disorder. In light of the high prevalence of alcohol
use disorders worldwide, it is important that these alcohol- induced diagnoses be consid-
ered before independent ment al disorders are diagnosed.
Unspecified Alcohol-Related Disorder
291.9 (F10.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of an alcohol-
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any specific alcohol-related disorder or any of the disorders in the substance-related
and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
Caffeine-Related Disorders
Caffeine Intoxication
Caffeine Withdrawal
Other Caffeine-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Caffeine-Related Disorder
Caffeine Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria 305.90 (F15.929)
A. Recent consumption of caffeine (typically a high dose well in excess of 250 mg).
B. Five (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly after,
caffeine use:
1. Restlessness.
2. Nervousness.
504 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
3. Excitement.
4. Insomnia.
5. Flushed face.
6. Diuresis.
7. Gastrointestinal disturbance.
8. Muscle twitching.
9. Rambling flow of thought and speech.
10. Tachycardia or cardiac arrhythmia.
11. Periods of inexhaustibility.
12. Psychomotor agitation.
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not bet-
ter explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another substance.
Diagnostic Features
Caffeine can be consumed from a number of di fferent sources, including coffee, tea, caf-
feinated soda, “energy” drinks, over-the-cou nter analgesics and cold remedies, energy
aids (e.g., drinks), weight-loss aids, and chocol ate. Caffeine is also increasingly being used
as an additive to vitamins and to food prod ucts. More than 85% of children and adults con-
sume caffeine regularly. Some caffeine user s display symptoms consistent with problem-
atic use, including tolerance and withdrawal (see “Caffeine Withdrawal” later in this
chapter); the data are not available at this time  to determine the clinical significance of a
caffeine use disorder and its pr evalence. In contrast, there is  evidence that caffeine with-
drawal and caffeine intoxication are clinically significant and sufficiently prevalent.
The essential feature of caffein e intoxication is recent cons umption of caffeine and five
or more signs or symptoms th at develop during or shortly after caffeine use (Criteria A
and B). Symptoms include restlessness, nervousness, excitement, insomnia, flushed face,
diuresis, and gastrointestinal complaints, which can occur with low doses (e.g., 200 mg) in
vulnerable individuals such as children, the el derly, or individuals who have not been ex-
posed to caffeine previously. Symptoms that ge nerally appear at levels of more than 1 g/
day include muscle twitching, rambling flow of thought and speech, tachycardia or car-
diac arrhythmia, periods of inexhaustibility, and psychomotor agitation. Caffeine intoxi-
cation may not occur despite high caffeine inta ke because of the development of tolerance.
The signs or symptoms must cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other importan t areas of functioning (Criterion C). The signs or symp-
toms must not be attr ibutable to another medical condit ion and are not better explained by
another mental disorder (e.g., an anxiety disorder) or intoxi cation with another substance
(Criterion D).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Mild sensory disturbances (e.g., ringing in the ears and flashes of light) may occur with high
doses of caffeine. Although large doses of caffeine can increase heart rate, smaller doses can
slow heart rate. Whether excess caffeine intake can cause headaches is unclear. On physical
examination, agitation, restlessness, sweati ng, tachycardia, flushed face, and increased
bowel motility may be seen. Caffeine blood levels may provide important information for
diagnosis, particularly when the individual is a poor historian, although these levels are not
diagnostic by themselves in view of the individual variation in response to caffeine.
Caffeine Intoxication 505
Prevalence
The prevalence of caffeine intoxication in the gene ral population is un clear. In the United
States, approximately 7% of individuals in the population may experience five or more symp-
toms along with functional impairment consiste nt with a diagnosis of caffeine intoxication.
Development and Course 
Consistent with a half-life of caffeine of approximately 4–6 hours, caffeine intoxication
symptoms usually remit within the first day or  so and do not have any known long-lasting
consequences. However, individuals who consum e very high doses of caffeine (i.e., 5–10
g) may require immediate medical attent ion, as such doses can be lethal.
With advancing age, individuals are likely to demonstrate increasingly intense reac-
tions to caffeine, with greater complaints of interference with sleep or feelings of hyper-
arousal. Caffeine intoxicati on among young individuals after consumption of highly
caffeinated products, includin g energy drinks, has been observed. Children and adoles-
cents may be at increased risk for caffeine into xication because of low body weight, lack of
tolerance, and lack of kn owledge about the pharmacolog ical effects of caffeine.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Caffeine intoxication is often seen among individuals who use caffeine
less frequently or in those who have recently increased their caffeine intake by a substan-
tial amount. Furthermore, oral contraceptives significantly de crease the elimination of caf-
feine and consequently may incre ase the risk of intoxication. 
Genetic and physiological. Genetic factors may affect risk of caffeine intoxication.
Functional Consequences of Caffeine Intoxication
Impairment from caffeine intoxication may have serious consequences, including dys-
function at work or school, social indiscretions, or failure to fulfill role obligations. More-
over, extremely high doses of caffeine can be fa tal. In some cases, caffeine intoxication may
precipitate a caffeine-induced disorder. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders. Caffeine intoxication may be characterized by symptoms (e.g.,
panic attacks) that resemble primary mental diso rders. To meet criteria for caffeine intoxica-
tion, the symptoms must not be associated with another medical condition or another mental
disorder, such as an anxiety di sorder, that could better expl ain them. Manic episodes; panic
disorder; generalized anxiety disorder; amphetami ne intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anx-
iolytic withdrawal or tobacco withdrawal; slee p disorders; and medication-induced side ef-
fects (e.g., akathisia) can cause a clinical picture that is similar to that of caffeine intoxication. 
Other caffeine-induced disorders. The temporal relationship of the symptoms to increased
caffeine use or to abstinence from caffeine help s to establish the diagno sis. Caffeine intoxica-
tion is differentiated from caffeine-induced anxiety disorder, with onset during intoxication
(see “Substance/Medicat ion-Induced Anxiety Disorder” in the chapter “Anxiety Disorders”),
and caffeine-induced sleep disorder, with onse t during intoxication (see “Substance/Medica-
tion-Induced Sleep Disorder” in the chapter “S leep-Wake Disorders”), by the fact that the
symptoms in these latter disorders are in excess  of those usually associ ated with caffeine in-
toxication and are severe enough to wa rrant independent clinical attention.
506 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Comorbidity
Typical dietary doses of caffeine have not been  consistently associated with medical prob-
lems. However, heavy use (e.g., >400 mg) can cause or exacerbate anxiety and somatic
symptoms and gastrointestinal distress. With  acute, extremely high doses of caffeine,
grand mal seizures and respiratory failure may re sult in death. Excessive caffeine use is as-
sociated with depressive diso rders, bipolar disorders, eati ng disorders, psychotic disor-
ders, sleep disorders, and subs tance-related disorders, wher eas individuals with anxiety
disorders are more likely to avoid caffeine.
Caffeine Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria 292.0 (F15.93)
A. Prolonged daily use of caffeine.
B. Abrupt cessation of or reduction in caffeine use, followed within 24 hours by three (or
more) of the following signs or symptoms: 
1. Headache.
2. Marked fatigue or drowsiness.
3. Dysphoric mood, depressed mood, or irritability.
4. Difficulty concentrating.
5. Flu-like symptoms (nausea, vomiting, or muscle pain/stiffness).
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not associated with the physiological effects of another
medical condition (e.g., migraine, viral illness) and are not better explained by another
mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from another substance.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of caffeine withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops after the abrupt cessation of (or substantial reduction in) pro-
longed daily caffeine ingestion (Criterion B) . The caffeine withdrawal syndrome is indi-
cated by three or more of the following (Criterion B): headache; marked fatigue or
drowsiness; dysphoric mood, depressed mood, or irritability; difficulty concentrating;
and flu-like symptoms (nausea, vomiting, or muscle pain/stiffness). The withdrawal syn-
drome causes clinical significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning (Criterion C) . The symptoms must not be associated with
the physiological effects of another medical co ndition and are not better explained by an-
other mental disorder (Criterion D). 
Headache is the hallmark feature of caffeine withdrawal and may be diffuse, gradual
in development, throbbing, severe, and sensitive to move ment. However, other symptoms
of caffeine withdrawal can occur in the abse nce of headache. Caffeine is the most widely
used behaviorally active drug in the world and is present in many different types of bev-
erages (e.g., coffee, tea, maté, soft drinks, energy drinks), foods, energy aids, medications,
and dietary supplements. Because caffeine ingestion is often integrated into social customs
and daily rituals (e.g., coffee break, tea time ), some caffeine consumers may be unaware of
their physical dependence on caffeine. Thus, caffeine withdrawal symptoms could be un-
expected and misattributed to other causes (e.g ., the flu, migraine). Furthermore, caffeine
withdrawal symptoms may occur when indivi duals are required to abstain from foods
and beverages prior to medical procedures or  when a usual caffeine dose is missed be-
cause of a change in routine (e.g., during travel, weekends).
Caffeine Withdrawal 507
The probability and severity of caffeine with drawal generally increase as a function of
usual daily caffeine dose. However, there is large variability among individuals and
within individuals across different episodes in  the incidence, severity, and time course of
withdrawal symptoms. Caffeine withdrawal sy mptoms may occur after abrupt cessation
of relatively low chronic daily doses of caffeine (i.e., 100 mg).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Caffeine abstinence has been shown to be as sociated with impaired behavioral and cogni-
tive performance (e.g., sustai ned attention). Electroencepha lographic studies have shown
that caffeine withdrawal symptoms are significantly associated with increases in theta
power and decreases in beta-2 power. Decre ased motivation to work and decreased socia-
bility have also been reported during caffe ine withdrawal. Increased analgesic use during
caffeine withdrawal has been documented.
Prevalence
More than 85% of adults and children in th e United States regularly consume caffeine,
with adult caffeine consumers ingesting abou t 280 mg/day on average. The incidence and
prevalence of the caffeine withdrawal syndro me in the general population are unclear. In
the United States, headache may occur in a pproximately 50% of cases of caffeine absti-
nence. In attempts to permanently stop caffein e use, more than 70% of individuals may ex-
perience at least one caffeine withdrawal sy mptom (47% may experience headache), and
24% may experience headache plus one or more other symptoms as well as functional
impairment due to withdrawal. Among individu als who abstain from caffeine for at least
24 hours but are not trying to permanently stop caffeine use, 11% may experience head-
ache plus one or more other symptoms as well as functional impairment. Caffeine con-
sumers can decrease the incidence of caffeine withdrawal by using ca ffeine daily or only
infrequently (e.g., no more than 2 consecutive days). Gradual reductio n in caffeine over a
period of days or weeks may decrease the incidence and severity of caffeine withdrawal. 
Development and Course
Symptoms usually begin 12–24 hours after the last caffeine dose and peak after 1–2 days
of abstinence. Caffeine withdrawal symptoms last for 2–9 days, with the possibility of
withdrawal headaches occurring for up to  21 days. Symptoms usually remit rapidly
(within 30–60 minutes) after re-ingestion of caffeine. 
Caffeine is unique in that it is a behavioral ly active drug that is consumed by individ-
uals of nearly all ages. Rates of caffeine consumption and overall level of caffeine con-
sumption increase with age until the early to mid-30s and then level off. Although caffeine
withdrawal among children and adolescents has been documented, relatively little is
known about risk factors for caffeine withdrawal among this age group. The use of highly
caffeinated energy drinks is increasing with  in young individuals, which could increase
the risk for caffeine withdrawal. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Heavy caffeine use has been observ ed among individuals with mental
disorders, including eating disorders; smoker s; prisoners; and drug and alcohol abusers.
Thus, these individuals could be at higher risk for caffeine withdrawal upon acute caffeine
abstinence.
Environmental. The unavailability of caffeine is an environmental risk factor for incipi-
ent withdrawal symptoms. While caffeine is le gal and usually widely available, there are
conditions in which caffeine use may be restricted, such as during medical procedures,
pregnancy, hospitalizations, religious observances, wartime, travel, and research partici-
508 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
pation. These external enviro nmental circumstances may precipitate a withdrawal syn-
drome in vulnerable individuals. 
Genetic and physiological factors. Genetic factors appear to increase vulnerability to
caffeine withdrawal, but no specific genes have been identified. 
Course modifiers. Caffeine withdrawal symptoms usua lly remit within 30–60 minutes
of reexposure to caffeine. Doses of caffeine  significantly less than one’s usual daily dose
may be sufficient to prevent or attenuate caffeine withdrawal sy mptoms (e.g., consump-
tion of 25 mg by an individual who typically consumes 300 mg).
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Habitual caffeine consumers who fast for religio us reasons may be at increased r isk for caf-
feine withdrawal. 
Functional Consequences of 
Caffeine Withdrawal Disorder
Caffeine withdrawal symptoms can vary from mild to extreme, at times causing functional
impairment in normal daily activities. Rates of functional impairment range from 10% to
55% (median 13%), with rates as high as 73% found among individuals who also show
other problematic features of caffeine use. Ex amples of functional impairment include be-
ing unable to work, exercise, or care for child ren; staying in bed all day; missing religious
services; ending a vacation early; and cancelling a social gathering. Caffeine withdrawal
headaches may be described by individuals as  “the worst headaches” ever experienced.
Decrements in cognitive and motor pe rformance have also been observed. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical disorders an d medical side effects. Several disorders should be consid-
ered in the differential diagnosis of caffeine withdrawal. Caffeine withdrawal can mimic
migraine and other headache di sorders, viral illnesses, sinu s conditions, tension, other
drug withdrawal states (e.g., from amphetami nes, cocaine), and medication side effects.
The final determination of caffeine withdrawal should rest on a determination of the pat-
tern and amount consumed, the time interval  between caffeine ab stinence and onset of
symptoms, and the particular clinical features presented by  the individual. A challenge
dose of caffeine followed by symptom remis sion may be used to confirm the diagnosis.
Comorbidity
Caffeine withdrawal may be associated with  major depressive disorder, generalized anx-
iety disorder, panic disorder, antisocial person ality disorder in adul ts, moderate to severe
alcohol use disorder, and cannabis and cocaine use. 
Other Caffeine-Induced Disorders
The following caffeine-induced disorders are described in other chapters of the manual
with disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-
induced mental disorders in these chapters):  caffeine-induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiety
Disorders”) and caffeine-indu ced sleep disorder (“Sleep-W ake Disorders”). These caf-
feine-induced disorders are diagnosed instead of caffeine intoxicati on or caffeine with-
drawal only when the symptoms are sufficie ntly severe to warrant independent clinical
attention.
Unspecified Caffeine-Related Disorder 509
Unspecified Caffeine-Related Disorder
292.9 (F15.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a caffeine-
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any specific caffeine-related disorder or any of the disorders in the substance-related
and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
Cannabis-Related Disorders
Cannabis Use Disorder
Cannabis Intoxication
Cannabis Withdrawal
Other Cannabis-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Cannabis-Related Disorder
Cannabis Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. A problematic pattern of cannabis use leading to clinically significant impairment or dis-
tress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. Cannabis is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control cannabis use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain cannabis, use canna-
bis, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use cannabis.
5. Recurrent cannabis use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work,
school, or home.
6. Continued cannabis use despite having persist ent or recurrent social or interper-
sonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of cannabis.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreat ional activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of cannabis use.
8. Recurrent cannabis use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
9. Cannabis use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
physical or psychological problem that is  likely to have been caused or exacerbated
by cannabis.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of cannabis to achieve intoxication or
desired effect.
b. Markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of cannabis.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: 
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for cannabis (refer to Criteria A and B
of the criteria set for cannabis withdrawal, pp. 517–518).
510 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
b. Cannabis (or a closely related substance) is taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal
symptoms.
Specify if:
In early remission:  After full criteria for cannabis us e disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria for cannabis use disorder have been met for at least 3 months but
for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong de-
sire or urge to use cannabis,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for cannabis use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for cannabis use disorder have been met at any time during a
period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a
strong desire or urge to use cannabis,” may be present).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment:  This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to cannabis is restricted. 
Code based on current severity: Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If a cannabis intoxication,
cannabis withdrawal, or another cannabis-induced mental disorder is also present, do not
use the codes below for cannabis use disorder. Instead, the comorbid cannabis use disorder
is indicated in the 4th character of the cannabis-induced disorder code (see the coding note
for cannabis intoxication, cannabis withdrawal, or a specific cannabis-induced mental disor-
der). For example, if there is comorbid cannabis-induced anxiety disorder and cannabis use
disorder, only the cannabis-induced anxiety disorder code is given, with the 4th character
indicating whether the comorbid cannabis use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe:
F12.180 for mild cannabis use disorder with cannabis-induced anxiety disorder or F12.280
for a moderate or severe cannabis use diso rder with cannabis-induced anxiety disorder.
Specify current severity:
305.20 (F12.10) Mild:  Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
304.30 (F12.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
304.30 (F12.20) Severe:  Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” app lies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is
both in remission and in a controlled environm ent (i.e., in early remission in a controlled
environment or in sustained remission in a controlled environmen t). Examples of these
environments are closely supe rvised and substanc e-free jails, therapeutic communities,
and locked hospital units. 
Changing severity across time in an individual may also be reflected by changes in the
frequency (e.g., days of use per month or ti mes used per day) and/or dose (e.g., amount
used per episode) of cannabis, as assessed by in dividual self-report, report of knowledge-
able others, clinician’s observ ations, and biological testing.
Diagnostic Features
Cannabis use disorder and the other cannabis-re lated disorders include problems that are
associated with substances derived from the cannabis plant and chemically similar syn-
thetic compounds. Over time, this plant material has accumulated many names (e.g.,
weed, pot, herb, grass, reefer, mary jane, da gga, dope, bhang, skunk, boom, gangster, kif,
and ganja). A concentrated extraction of the cannabis plant that is also commonly used is
hashish. Cannabis  is the generic and perhaps the most appropriate scientific term for the
psychoactive substance(s) derived from the pl ant, and as such it is used in this manual
to refer to all forms of cannabis-like substances, including synthetic cannabinoid com-
pounds.
Cannabis Use Disorder 511
Synthetic oral formulations (pill/capsules) of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-
THC) are available by prescripti on for a number of approved medical indications (e.g., for
nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy; for anorexia and weight loss in individuals
with AIDS). Other synthetic cannabinoid co mpounds have been manufactured and dis-
tributed for nonmedical use in the form of plant material that has been sprayed with a can-
nabinoid formulation (e.g., K2, Spice, JWH-018, JWH-073). 
The cannabinoids have diverse effects in the brain, prominent among which are actions
on CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptors that ar e found throughout the central nervous sys-
tem. Endogenous ligands for these receptor s behave essentially like neurotransmitters.
The potency of cannabis (delta-9-THC concentration) that is generally available varies
greatly, ranging from 1% to approximately 15% in typical cannabis plant material and
10%–20% in hashish. During the past two de cades, a steady increase in the potency of
seized cannabis has been observed. 
Cannabis is most commonly smoked via a variety of methods: pipes, water pipes
(bongs or hookahs), cigarettes (joints or reefer s), or, most recently, in the paper from hol-
lowed out cigars (blunts). Cannabis is also sometimes ingested orally, typically by mixing
it into food. More recently, devices have be en developed in which cannabis is “vapor-
ized.” Vaporization involves heating the plant material to release psychoactive cannabi-
noids for inhalation. As with other psychoactive substances, smoking (and vaporization)
typically produces more rapid onset and more intense experiences of the desired effects. 
Individuals who regularly use cannabis can develop all the genera l diagnostic features
of a substance use disorder. Cannabis use diso rder is commonly observed as the only sub-
stance use disorder experienced by the individu al; however, it also frequently occurs con-
currently with other types of substance use di sorders (i.e., alcohol, cocaine, opioid). In
cases for which multiple types of substances are used, many times the individual may
minimize the symptoms related to cannabis, as  the symptoms may be less severe or cause
less harm than those directly related to the use of the other substances. Pharmacological
and behavioral tolerance to most of the effect s of cannabis has been reported in individuals
who use cannabis persistently. Generally, tolerance is lost when cannabis use is discontin-
ued for a significant period of time (i.e., for at least several months). 
New to DSM-5 is the recognition that abrupt cessation of daily or near-daily cannabis
use often results in the onset of a cannabis withdrawal syndrome. Common symptoms of
withdrawal include irritability, anger or ag gression, anxiety, depressed mood, restless-
ness, sleep difficulty, and decreased appetite or weight loss. Although typically not as
severe as alcohol or opiate withdrawal, the cannabis withdrawal syndrome can cause sig-
nificant distress and contribute to difficulty quitting or relapse among those trying to
abstain. 
Individuals with cannabis use disorder may use cannabis throughout the day over a
period of months or years, and thus may spend many hours a da y under the influence.
Others may use less frequently, but their use causes recurrent problems related to family,
school, work, or other important activities (e.g ., repeated absences at work; neglect of fam-
ily obligations). Periodic cannabis use and intoxication can negatively affect behavioral
and cognitive functioning and thus interfere with optimal performance at work or school,
or place the individual at increased physical risk when performing activities that could be
physically hazardous (e.g., driving a car; playing certain sports; performing manual work
activities, including operating machinery). Ar guments with spouses or parents over the
use of cannabis in the home, or its use in th e presence of children, can adversely impact
family functioning and are common features of  those with cannabis use disorder. Last, in-
dividuals with cannabis use disorder may continue using despite knowledge of physical
problems (e.g., chronic cough related to smoking) or psychological problems (e.g., exces-
sive sedation or exacerbation of other ment al health problems) associated with its use.
Whether or not cannabis is being used for legitimate medical reasons may also affect
diagnosis. When a substance is taken as indicated for a medical condition, symptoms of
512 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
tolerance and withdrawal will naturally occur and should not be used as the primary cri-
teria for determining a diagnosis of a substance use disorder. Although medical uses of
cannabis remain controversial and equivocal,  use for medical circumstances should be
considered when a diagnosis is being made. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals who regularly use cannabis often report that it is being used to cope with
mood, sleep, pain, or other physiological or psychological problems, and those diagnosed
with cannabis use disorder frequently do have  concurrent other mental disorders. Careful
assessment typically reveals reports of cannabis use contributing to exacerbation of these
same symptoms, as well as other reasons for freq uent use (e.g., to experience euphoria, to
forget about problems, in respon se to anger, as an enjoyable social activity). Related to this
issue, some individuals who use cannabis mult iple times per day for the aforementioned
reasons do not perceive themselves as (and thus do not report) spending an excessive
amount of time under the influence or recovering from the effects of cannabis, despite be-
ing intoxicated on cannabis or coming down from  it effects for the majority of most days.
An important marker of a substance use disorder  diagnosis, particularly in milder cases, is
continued use despite a clear risk of negative co nsequences to other valued activities or re-
lationships (e.g., school, work, sport activity, partner or parent relationship). 
Because some cannabis users are motivated to  minimize their amount or frequency of
use, it is important to be aware of common signs and symptoms of cannabis use and intox-
ication so as to better assess the extent of us e. As with other substances, experienced users
of cannabis develop behavioral and pharmacolo gical tolerance such that it can be difficult
to detect when they are under the influence. Signs of acute and chro nic use include red eyes
(conjunctival injection), cannabis odor on clot hing, yellowing of finger tips (from smoking
joints), chronic cough, burning of incense (to hide the odor), and exaggerated craving and
impulse for specific foods, sometimes at unusual times of the day or night. 
Prevalence 
Cannabinoids, especially cann abis, are the most widely us ed illicit psychoactive sub-
stances in the United States. The 12-month prevalence of ca nnabis use disorder (DSM-IV
abuse and dependence rates combined) is appr oximately 3.4% among 12- to 17-year-olds
and 1.5% among adults age 18 years and older.  Rates of cannabis use disorder are greater
among adult males (2.2%) than among adult females (0.8%) and among 12- to 17-year-old
males (3.8%) than among 12- to 17-year-old  females (3.0%). Twelve-month prevalence
rates of cannabis use disorder among adults decrease with age, with rates highest among
18- to 29-year-olds (4.4%) and lowest amon g individuals age 65 years and older (0.01%).
The high prevalence of cannabis use disord er likely reflects the much more widespread
use of cannabis relative to other illicit drug s rather than greater addictive potential. 
Ethnic and racial differences in prevalence are moderate. Twelve-month prevalences
of cannabis use disorder vary markedly across racial-ethnic subgroups in the United
States. For 12- to 17-year-olds, rates are hi ghest among Native American and Alaska Na-
tives (7.1%) compared with Hispanics (4.1%) , whites (3.4%), African Americans (2.7%),
and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.9%). Among adults, the prevalence of can-
nabis use disorder is also highest among Nati ve Americans and Alaska Natives (3.4%) rel-
ative to rates among African Americans (1.8%) , whites (1.4%), Hispanics (1.2%), and Asian
and Pacific Islanders (1.2%). During the past decade the prevalence of cannabis use disor-
der has increased among adults and adolescent s. Gender differences in cannabis use dis-
order generally are concordant with those in  other substance use disorders. Cannabis use
disorder is more commonly observed in males,  although the magnitude of this difference
is less among adolescents. 
Cannabis Use Disorder 513
Development and Course
The onset of cannabis use disorder can occur at  any time during or following adolescence,
but onset is most commonly during adolescenc e or young adulthood. Although much less
frequent, onset of cannabis use disorder in the preteen years or in the late 20s or older can
occur. Recent acceptance by some of the us e and availability of “medical marijuana” may
increase the rate of onset of cannabis use disorder among older adults.
Generally, cannabis use disorder develops over an extended period of time, although
the progression appears to be more rapid in ad olescents, particularly those with pervasive
conduct problems. Most people who develop a cannabis use disorder typically establish a
pattern of cannabis use that gradually increases in both frequency and amount. Cannabis,
along with tobacco and alcohol, is traditiona lly the first substance that adolescents try.
Many perceive cannabis use as less harmful than alcohol or tobacco use, and this percep-
tion likely contributes to increased use. Moreover, cannabis intoxication does not typically
result in as severe behavioral and cognitive dysfunction as does sig nificant alcohol intox-
ication, which may increase the probability of  more frequent use in more diverse situa-
tions than with alcohol. These factors likely contribute to the potential rapid transition
from cannabis use to a cannabis use disord er among some adolescents and the common
pattern of using throughout the day that is commonly ob served among those with more
severe cannabis use disorder.
Cannabis use disorder among preteens, adoles cents, and young adults is typically ex-
pressed as excessive use with peers that is a component of a pattern of other delinquent
behaviors usually associated with conduct pr oblems. Milder cases primarily reflect con-
tinued use despite clear problems related to di sapproval of use by other peers, school ad-
ministration, or family, which also places the youth at risk for physical or behavioral
consequences. In more severe cases, there is a progression to using alone or using through-
out the day such that use interferes with da ily functioning and takes the place of previ-
ously established, prosocial activities.
With adolescent users, changes in mood stab ility, energy level, and eating patterns are
commonly observed. These signs and symptoms ar e likely due to the direct effects of can-
nabis use (intoxication) and the subsequent effects following acute intoxication (coming
down), as well as attempts to conceal use from others. Sc hool-related problems are com-
monly associated with cannabis use disorder in  adolescents, particularly a dramatic drop
in grades, truancy, and reduced interest in general school activities and outcomes.
Cannabis use disorder among adults typically involves well-establish ed patterns of daily
cannabis use that continue despite clear psycho social or medical problems. Many adults have
experienced repeated desire to st op or have failed at repeated cessation attempts. Milder adult
cases may resemble the more common adolescent cases in that cannabis use is not as frequent
or heavy but continues despite po tential significant consequences of sustained use. The rate of
use among middle-age and older adults appears to be increasing, likely because of a cohort ef-
fect resulting from high prevalence of use in the late 1960s and the 1970s.
Early onset of cannabis use (e.g., prior to ag e 15 years) is a robust predictor of the de-
velopment of cannabis use disorder and other types of substance use disorders and mental
disorders during young adulthood. Such early onset is likely related to concurrent other
externalizing problems, most notably conduc t disorder symptoms. However, early onset
is also a predictor of internalizing problems and as such probably reflects a general risk
factor for the development of  mental health disorders.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. A history of conduct disorder in ch ildhood or adolescence and antiso-
cial personality disorder are risk factors for the developmen t of many substance-related
disorders, including cannabis-related disorders. Other risk factors include externalizing
514 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
or internalizing disorders during childhood or  adolescence. Youths with high behavioral
disinhibition scores show early-onset substance use disorders, including cannabis use dis-
order, multiple substance involvem ent, and early conduct problems.
Environmental. Risk factors include academic failure , tobacco smoking, unstable or abu-
sive family situation, use of cannabis among immediate family members, a family history
of a substance use disorder, and low socioecono mic status. As with all substances of abuse,
the ease of availability of the substance is a ri sk factor; cannabis is relatively easy to obtain
in most cultures, which increases the risk  of developing a cannabis use disorder.
Genetic and physiological. Genetic influences contribute to the development of canna-
bis use disorders. Heritable factors contribute between 30% and 80% of the total variance
in risk of cannabis use disorders. It should be noted that common genetic and shared en-
vironmental influences between cannabis and other types of substance use disorders sug-
gest a common genetic basis for adolesce nt substance use and conduct problems. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Cannabis is probably the world’s most commo nly used illicit substance. Occurrence of
cannabis use disorder across countries is unkn own, but the prevalence rates are likely sim-
ilar among developed countries. It is frequently among the fi rst drugs of experimentation
(often in the teens) of all cultur al groups in the United States. 
Acceptance of cannabis for medical purposes varies widely across and within cultures.
Cultural factors (acceptability and legal status ) that might impact diagnosis relate to dif-
ferential consequences across cultures for dete ction of use (i.e., arrest, school suspensions,
or employment suspension). The general change in substance use disorder diagnostic cri-
teria from DSM-IV to DSM-5 (i.e., removal of  the recurrent substance-related legal prob-
lems criterion) mitigates this concern to some degree.
Diagnostic Markers
Biological tests for cannabinoid metabolites are useful for determining if an individual has
recently used cannabis. Such testing is help ful in making a diagnosis, particularly in
milder cases if an individual denies using while others (family, work, school) purport con-
cern about a substance use problem. Because cannabinoids are fat soluble, they persist in
bodily fluids for extended periods of time an d are excreted slowly. Expertise in urine test-
ing methods is needed to reliably interpret results. 
Functional Consequences of Cannabis Use Disorder
Functional consequences of cannabis use disord er are part of the di agnostic criteria. Many
areas of psychosocial, cognitive, and health  functioning may be co mpromised in relation
to cannabis use disorder. Cognitive function, particularly higher executive function, ap-
pears to be compromised in cannabis users, an d this relationship appears to be dose de-
pendent (both acutely and chronically). This  may contribute to increased difficulty at
school or work. Cannabis use has been related to a reduction in prosocial goal-directed ac-
tivity, which some have labeled an amotivational syndrome,  that manifests itself in poor
school performance and employ ment problems. These problems may be related to perva-
sive intoxication or recovery from the effects of intoxication . Similarly, cannabis-associated
problems with social relationships are common ly reported in those with cannabis use dis-
order. Accidents due to engagement in pote ntially dangerous behaviors while under the
influence (e.g., driving, sport, recreational or employment ac tivities) are also of concern.
Cannabis smoke contains high levels of carc inogenic compounds that place chronic users
at risk for respiratory illnesses similar to those experienced by to bacco smokers. Chronic
cannabis use may contribute to the onset or exacerbation of many ot her mental disorders.
In particular, concern has been raised about cannabis use as a causal factor in schizophrenia
and other psychotic disorders. Cannabis use ca n contribute to the onset of an acute psy-
Cannabis Use Disorder 515
chotic episode, can exacerbate some sympto ms, and can adversely affect treatment of a
major psychotic illness.
Differential Diagnosis
Nonproblematic use of cannabis. The distinction between nonproblematic use of can-
nabis and cannabis use disorder can be difficult  to make because social, behavioral, or psy-
chological problems may be difficult to attribut e to the substance, especially in the context
of use of other substances. Also, denial of heavy cannabis use and the attribution that can-
nabis is related to or causing substantial problems are common among individuals who
are referred to treatment by others (i.e., sch ool, family, employer, criminal justice system).
Other mental disorders. Cannabis-induced disorder may be characterized by symp-
toms (e.g., anxiety) that resemble primary mental disorders (e.g., gene ralized anxiety dis-
order vs. cannabis-induced anxiety disorder, with generalized anxiety, with onset during
intoxication). Chronic intake of cannabis can produce a lack of motivation that resembles
persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia). Acute adverse reactions to cannabis should be
differentiated from the symptoms of panic di sorder, major depressive disorder, delusional
disorder, bipolar disorder, or schizophrenia , paranoid type. Physical examination will
usually show an increased pulse and conjunctiv al injection. Urine toxicological testing can
be helpful in making a diagnosis.
Comorbidity
Cannabis has been commonly thought of as a “gateway” drug because individuals who
frequently use cannabis have a much greater lifetime probabili ty than nonusers of using
what are commonly considered more dangerou s substances, like opioids or cocaine. Can-
nabis use and cannabis use disorder are highly comorbid with other substance use disor-
ders. Co-occurring mental co nditions are common in canna bis use disorder. Cannabis use
has been associated with poor er life satisfaction; increased mental health treatment and
hospitalization; and higher rates of depressi on, anxiety disorders, suicide attempts, and
conduct disorder. Individuals with past-year or lifetime cannabis use disorder have high
rates of alcohol use disorder (greater than 50%) and tobacco use disorder (53%). Rates of
other substance use disorders are also likely to be high among individuals with cannabis
use disorder. Among those seeking treatmen t for a cannabis use disorder, 74% report
problematic use of a secondary or tertiary su bstance: alcohol (40%), cocaine (12%), meth-
amphetamine (6%), and heroin or other opia tes (2%). Among those younger than 18 years,
61% reported problematic use of a secondary su bstance: alcohol (48%), cocaine (4%), meth-
amphetamine (2%), and heroin or other opiates (2%). Cannabis use disorder is also often
observed as a secondary problem among those with a primary diagnosis of other substance
use disorders, with approximately 25%–80% of those in treatment for another substance
use disorder reporting use of cannabis.
Individuals with past-year or lifetime diag noses of cannabis use disorder also have
high rates of concurrent ment al disorders other than substa nce use disorders. Major de-
pressive disorder (11%), any anxiety disorder (24%), and bipolar I disorder (13%) are quite
common among individuals with a past-year di agnosis of a cannabis use disorder, as are
antisocial (30%), obsessive-co mpulsive, (19%), and paranoid (18%) personality disorders.
Approximately 33% of adolescents with canna bis use disorder have internalizing disor-
ders (e.g., anxiety, depressio n, posttraumatic stre ss disorder), and 60% have externalizing
disorders (e.g., conduct disorder, atte ntion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder).
Although cannabis use can impact multiple asp ects of normal human functioning, in-
cluding the cardiovascular, immune, neuromuscular, ocular, reproductive, and respira-
tory systems, as well as appetite and cognit ion/perception, there are few clear medical
conditions that commonly co-occur with cannab is use disorder. The most significant health
516 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
effects of cannabis involve the respiratory system, and chronic cannabis smokers exhibit
high rates of respiratory symptoms of bronch itis, sputum production, shortness of breath,
and wheezing.
Cannabis Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of cannabis.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavio ral or psychological changes (e.g., impaired
motor coordination, euphoria, anxiety, sensat ion of slowed time, impaired judgment,
social withdrawal) that developed during, or shortly after, cannabis use.
C. Two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing within 2 hours of canna-
bis use:
1. Conjunctival injection.
2. Increased appetite.
3. Dry mouth.
4. Tachycardia.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not better
explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another substance.
Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances:  Hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory, vi-
sual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of a delirium.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.89.  The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
or not there is a comorbid cannabis use diso rder and whether or not there are perceptual
disturbances. 
For cannabis intoxication, with out perceptual disturbances: If a mild cannabis use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.129,  and if a moderate or severe
cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.229.  If there is no co-
morbid cannabis use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F12.929.
For cannabis intoxication, wit h perceptual disturbances:  If a mild cannabis use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.122,  and if a moderate or severe
cannabis use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F12.222.  If there is no co-
morbid cannabis use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F12.922.
Specifiers
When hallucinations occur in the absence of inta ct reality testing, a diagnosis of substance/
medication-induced psychotic di sorder should be considered.
Diagnostic Features 
The essential feature of cannabis intoxication is the presence of clinically significant prob-
lematic behavioral or psychological changes th at develop during, or shortly after, canna-
bis use (Criterion B). Intoxication typically  begins with a “high” feeling followed by
symptoms that include euphoria with inapprop riate laughter and grandiosity, sedation,
lethargy, impairment in short- term memory, difficulty carrying out complex mental pro-
cesses, impaired judgment, distorted sensory perceptions, impaired motor performance,
and the sensation that time is passing slowly. Occasionally, anxiety (which can be severe),
Cannabis Withdrawal 517
dysphoria, or social withdrawal occurs. These psychoactive effects are accompanied by
two or more of the following signs, developi ng within 2 hours of cannabis use: conjuncti-
val injection, increased appetite, dry mouth, and tachycardia (Criterion C). 
Intoxication develops within minutes if the cannabis is smoked but may take a few
hours to develop if the cannabis is ingested orally. The effects usually last 3–4 hours, with
the duration being somewhat lo nger when the substance is in gested orally. The magnitude
of the behavioral and physiological changes depends on the dose, the method of adminis-
tration, and the characteristics of the individual using the substance, such as rate of absorp-
tion, tolerance, and sensitivity to the effects of the substance. Because most cannabinoids,
including delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta-9-T HC), are fat soluble, the effects of canna-
bis or hashish may occasionally persist or re occur for 12–24 hours because of the slow re-
lease of psychoactive substances from fa tty tissue or to ente rohepatic circulation.
Prevalence
The prevalence of actual episodes of cannabis intoxication in the general population is un-
known. However, it is probable that most ca nnabis users would at some time meet criteria
for cannabis intoxication. Given this, the prev alence of cannabis users and the prevalence
of individuals experiencing canna bis intoxication are likely similar.
Functional Consequences of Cannabis Intoxication
Impairment from cannabis intoxication ma y have serious consequences, including dys-
function at work or school, social indiscretion s, failure to fulfill role  obligations, traffic ac-
cidents, and having unprotected sex. In rare cases, cannabis intoxication may precipitate a
psychosis that may vary in duration. 
Differential Diagnosis
Note that if the clinical presentation includes  hallucinations in the absence of intact reality
testing, a diagnosis of subs tance/medication-induced psyc hotic disorder should be con-
sidered.
Other substance intoxication. Cannabis intoxicati on may resemble intoxication with
other types of substances. However, in contrast to cannabis intoxication, alcohol intoxica-
tion and sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic in toxication frequently decrease appetite, in-
crease aggressive behavior, and produce nyst agmus or ataxia. Hallucinogens in low doses
may cause a clinical picture that resembles cannabis intoxication. Phencyclidine, like can-
nabis, can be smoked and also causes perceptual changes, but phencyclidine intoxication
is much more likely to cause ataxia and aggressive behavior. 
Other cannabis-induced disorders. Cannabis intoxication is distinguished from the other
cannabis-induced disorders (e.g., cannabis-in duced anxiety disorder, with onset during
intoxication) because the symptoms in these latter disorders predomin ate the clinical pre-
sentation and are severe enough to wa rrant independent clinical attention. 
Cannabis Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria 292.0 (F12.288)
A. Cessation of cannabis use that has been heavy and prolonged (i.e., usually daily or
almost daily use over a period of at least a few months).
B. Three (or more) of the following signs and symptoms develop within approximately 1 week
after Criterion A:
518 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
1. Irritability, anger, or aggression.
2. Nervousness or anxiety.
3. Sleep difficulty (e.g., insomnia, disturbing dreams).
4. Decreased appetite or weight loss.
5. Restlessness.
6. Depressed mood.
7. At least one of the following physical symptoms causing significant discomfort: ab-
dominal pain, shakiness/tremors, sweating, fever, chills, or headache.
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from
another substance.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.0. The ICD-10-CM code for cannabis withdrawal
is F12.288. Note that the ICD-10-CM code indicates the comorbid presence of a moderate
or severe cannabis use disorder, reflecting the fact that cannabis withdrawal can only oc-
cur in the presence of a moderate or severe cannabis use disorder. It is not permissible to
code a comorbid mild cannabis use disorder with cannabis withdrawal.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of cannabis withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops after the cessation of  or substantial reduction in heavy and pro-
longed cannabis use. In addition to the sympto ms in Criterion B, the following may also be
observed postabstinence: fatigu e, yawning, difficulty concentrating, and rebound periods
of increased appetite and hypersomnia that follo w initial periods of loss of appetite and in-
somnia. For the diagnosis, withdrawal symptoms  must cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occu pational, or other important ar eas of functioning (Criterion
C). Many cannabis users report smoking cannabi s or taking other substances to help re-
lieve withdrawal symptoms, and many report  that withdrawal symptoms make quitting
difficult or have contributed to relapse. Th e symptoms typically ar e not of sufficient se-
verity to require medical attention, but medica tion or behavioral strategies may help alle-
viate symptoms and improve prognosis in those trying to quit using cannabis.
Cannabis withdrawal is commonly observed in individuals seeking treatment for can-
nabis use as well as in heavy cannabis users who are not seeking treatment. Among indi-
viduals who have used cannabis regularly during  some period of their lifetime, up to one-
third report having experienced cannabis wi thdrawal. Among adults and adolescents en-
rolled in treatment or  heavy cannabis users, 50%–95% report cannabis withdrawal. These
findings indicate that cannabis withdrawal occurs am ong a substantial subset of regular
cannabis users who try to quit. 
Development and Course
The amount, duration, and frequency of canna bis smoking that is required to produce an
associated withdrawal disorder during a quit attempt are unknown. Most symptoms have
their onset within the first 24–72 hours of ce ssation, peak within the first week, and last
approximately 1–2 weeks. Sleep difficulties may last more than 30 days. Cannabis with-
drawal has been documented among adolescents and adults. Withdrawal tends to be more
common and severe among adults, most likely related to the more persistent and greater
frequency and quantity of use among adults.
Unspecified Cannabis-Related Disorder 519
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Most likely, the prevalence and severity of cannabis withdrawal are
greater among heavier cannabis users, and part icularly among those seeking treatment for
cannabis use disorders. Withdrawal severity also appears to be positiv ely related to the se-
verity of comorbid sympto ms of mental disorders. 
Functional Consequences of Cannabis Withdrawal
Cannabis users report using cannabis to re lieve withdrawal symp toms, suggesting that
withdrawal might contribute to ongoing expr ession of cannabis use disorder. Worse out-
comes may be associated with greater withdraw al. A substantial proportion of adults and
adolescents in treatment for moderate to se vere cannabis use disorder acknowledge mod-
erate to severe withdrawal symptoms, and ma ny complain that these symptoms make ces-
sation more difficult. Cannabis users report having relapsed to cannabis use or initiating
use of other drugs (e.g., tranquilizers) to pr ovide relief from cannabis withdrawal symp-
toms. Last, individuals living with cannabis us ers observe significant withdrawal effects,
suggesting that such symptoms ar e disruptive to daily living. 
Differential Diagnosis
Because many of the symptoms of cannabis wi thdrawal are also symptoms of other sub-
stance withdrawal syndromes or of depressi ve or bipolar disorder s, careful evaluation
should focus on ensuring that the symptoms ar e not better explained by cessation from an-
other substance (e.g., tobacco or alcohol with drawal), another mental  disorder (general-
ized anxiety disorder, major depressive disorder), or another medical condition.
Other Cannabis-Induced Disorders
The following cannabis-induced disorders are desc ribed in other chapters of the manual with
disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-induced
mental disorders in these chapters): cannab is-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizophrenia
Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders”); cannabis-induced anxiet y disorder (“Anxiety
Disorders”); and cannabis-induced sleep diso rder (“Sleep-Wake Disorders”). For cannabis
intoxication delirium, see the criteria and disc ussion of delirium in  the chapter “Neurocog-
nitive Disorders.” These cannabis-induced diso rders are diagnosed instead of cannabis in-
toxication or cannabis withdrawal when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant
independent clinical attention. 
Unspecified Cannabis-Related Disorder
292.9 (F12.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a cannabis-
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any specific cannabis-related disorder or any of the disorders in the substance-related
and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
520 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Hallucinogen-Related Disorders
Phencyclidine Use Disorder
Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder
Phencyclidine Intoxication
Other Hallucinogen Intoxication
Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder
Other Phencyclidine-Induced Disorders
Other Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Phencyclidine-Related Disorder
Unspecified Hallucino gen-Related Disorder
Phencyclidine Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. A pattern of phencyclidine (or a pharmacologically similar substance) use leading to
clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the follow-
ing, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. Phencyclidine is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was in-
tended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control phency-
clidine use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain phencyclidine, use the
phencyclidine, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use phencyclidine.
5. Recurrent phencyclidine use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences from work or poor work performance
related to phencyclidine use; phencyclidine-related absences, suspensions, or ex-
pulsions from school; neglec t of children or household).
6. Continued phencyclidine use despite having persistent or recurrent social or inter-
personal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the phencyclidine (e.g.,
arguments with a spouse about consequences of intoxication; physical fights).
7. Important social, occupational, or recreat ional activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of phencyclidine use.
8. Recurrent phencyclidine use in situations in which it is physically hazardous (e.g.,
driving an automobile or operating a machine when impaired by a phencyclidine). 
9. Phencyclidine use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recur-
rent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exac-
erbated by the phencyclidine.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: 
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the phencyclidine to achieve intoxi-
cation or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the
phencyclidine.
Phencyclidine Use Disorder 521
Note: Withdrawal symptoms and signs are not established for phencyclidines, and so this
criterion does not apply. (Withdrawal from phencyclidines has been reported in animals
but not documented in human users.)
Specify if:
In early remission:  After full criteria for phencyclidine use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for phencyclidine use disorder have been met for at least
3 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving,
or a strong desire or urge to use the phencyclidine,” may be met).
In sustained remission:  After full criteria for phencyclidine use disorder were previ-
ously met, none of the criteria for phencyclidine use disorder have been met at any time
during a period of 12 months or longer (wit h the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving,
or a strong desire or urge to use the phencyclidine,” may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlle d environment:  This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to phencyclidines is restricted.
Coding based on current severity:  Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If a phencyclidine intoxica-
tion or another phencyclidine-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes
below for phencyclidine use disorder. Instead, the comorbid phencyclidine use disorder is in-
dicated in the 4th character of the phencyclidine-induced disorder code (see the coding note
for phencyclidine intoxication or a specific phencyclidine-induced mental disorder). For ex-
ample, if there is comorbid phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder, only the phencyclidine-
induced psychotic disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the co-
morbid phencyclidine use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F16.159 for mild phencycli-
dine use disorder with phencyclidine-induced psyc hotic disorder or F16.259 for a moderate
or severe phencyclidine use disorder with phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder.
Specify current severity:
305.90 (F16.10) Mild:  Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
304.60 (F16.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
304.60 (F16.20) Severe:  Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” app lies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is
both in remission and in a controlled environm ent (i.e., in early remission in a controlled
environment or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these
environments are closely supe rvised and substanc e-free jails, therapeutic communities,
and locked hospital units. 
Diagnostic Features
The phencyclidines (or phencyclidine-like substances) include phencyclidine (e.g., PCP,
“angel dust”) and less potent but similarly ac ting compounds such as ketamine, cyclohex-
amine, and dizocilpine. These substances were  first developed as dissociative anesthetics
in the 1950s and became street drugs in the 1960s. They produce feelings of separation
from mind and body (hence “d issociative”) in low doses, an d at high doses, stupor and
coma can result. These substances are most commonly smoked or taken orally, but they
may also be snorted or injected. Although the primary psychoactive ef fects of PCP last for
a few hours, the total elimination rate of this  drug from the body typically extends 8 days
or longer. The hallucinogenic effects in vulne rable individuals may last for weeks and may
precipitate a persistent psychotic episode resembling schizophrenia. Ketamine has been
observed to have utility in the treatment of  major depressive disorder. Withdrawal symp-
522 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
toms have not been clearly established in hu mans, and therefore the withdrawal criterion
is not included in the diagnosis of phencyclidine use disorder. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Phencyclidine may be detected in urine for up to 8 days or even longer at very high doses. In
addition to laboratory tests to detect its presence, characteristic symptoms resulting from
intoxication with phencyclidine or related su bstances may aid in its diagnosis. Phencycli-
dine is likely to produce dissociative sympto ms, analgesia, nystagmus, and hypertension,
with risk of hypotension and shock. Violen t behavior can also occur with phencyclidine
use, as intoxicated persons may believe that  they are being attacked. Residual symptoms
following use may resemble schizophrenia. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of phen cyclidine use disorder is unknown.  Approximately 2.5% of the pop-
ulation reports having ever used phencyclidine. The proportion of users increases with
age, from 0.3% of 12- to 17-year-olds, to 1.3% of 18- to 25-year -olds, to 2.9% of those age 26
years and older reporting ever using phencyclid ine. There appears to have been an in-
crease among 12th graders in both ever used (to 2.3% from 1.8%) and past-year use (to 1.3%
from 1.0%) of phencyclidine. Past-year use of  ketamine appears relatively stable among
12th graders (1.6%–1.7% over the past 3 years).
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
There is little information about risk factor s for phencyclidine use disorder. Among indi-
viduals admitted to substanc e abuse treatment, those for whom phencyclidine was the
primary substance were younger than those admitted for other substance use, had lower
educational levels, and were more likely to be  located in the West and Northeast regions of
the United States, compared with other admissions. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Ketamine use in youths ages 16–23 years ha s been reported to be more common among
whites (0.5%) than among other ethnic gr oups (range 0%–0.3%). Among individuals ad-
mitted to substance abuse treatment, those for whom phencyclidine was the primary sub-
stance were predominantly black (49%) or Hispanic (29%).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males make up about three-quarters of those with phencyclidine-related emergency room
visits.
Diagnostic Markers
Laboratory testing may be useful, as phencyclidin e is present in the urine in intoxicated in-
dividuals up to 8 days after ingestion. The in dividual’s history, along with certain physical
signs, such as nystagmus, analgesia and pr ominent hypertension, may aid in distinguish-
ing the phencyclidine clinical picture from that of other hallucinogens. 
Functional Consequences of Phencyclidine Use Disorder
In individuals with phencyclidine use disorder, there may be physical evidence of injuries
from accidents, fights, and falls. Chronic use of phencyclidine may lead to deficits in mem-
ory, speech, and cognition that may last for months. Cardiovascular and neurological tox-
icities (e.g., seizures, dystonias, dyskinesia s, catalepsy, hypothermia or hyperthermia)
may result from intoxication with phencyclid ine. Other consequences include intracranial
hemorrhage, rhabdomyolysis, respiratory problems, and (occasionally) cardiac arrest. 
Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder 523
Differential Diagnosis 
Other substance use disorders. Distinguishing the effects of phencyclidine from those
of other substances is import ant, since it may be a common additive to other substances
(e.g., cannabis, cocaine).
Schizophrenia and other mental disorders. Some of the effects of phencyclidine and
related substance use may resemble symptoms of  other psychiatric disorders, such as psy-
chosis (schizophrenia), low mood (major de pressive disorder), vi olent aggressive be-
haviors (conduct disorder, antisocial person ality disorder). Discerning whether these
behaviors occurred before the intake of the dr ug is important in the differentiation of acute
drug effects from preexisting mental disord er. Phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder
should be considered when there is impaired  reality testing in individuals experiencing
disturbances in perception result ing from ingestion of phencyclidine.
Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. A problematic pattern of hallucinogen (other than phencyclidine) use leading to clini-
cally significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following,
occurring within a 12-month period: 
1. The hallucinogen is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessfu l efforts to cut down or control halluci-
nogen use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the hallucinogen, use
the hallucinogen, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the hallucinogen.
5. Recurrent hallucinogen use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at
work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences from work or poor work perfor-
mance related to hallucinogen use; hallucinogen-related absences, suspensions,
or expulsions from school; neglect of children or household).
6. Continued hallucinogen use despite having persistent or recurrent social or inter-
personal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the hallucinogen (e.g.,
arguments with a spouse about consequences of intoxication; physical fights).
7. Important social, occupational, or recreat ional activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of hallucinogen use.
8. Recurrent hallucinogen use in situations in which it is physically hazardous (e.g.,
driving an automobile or operating a mach ine when impaired by the hallucinogen).
9. Hallucinogen use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recur-
rent physical or psychological problem t hat is likely to have been caused or exac-
erbated by the hallucinogen.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: 
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the hallucinogen to achieve intoxi-
cation or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the hal-
lucinogen.
Note: Withdrawal symptoms and signs are not established for hallucinogens, and so this
criterion does not apply. 
524 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Specify the particular hallucinogen.
Specify if:
In early remission:  After full criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder were previ-
ously met, none of the criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder have been met for
at least 3 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4,
“Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the hallucinogen,” may be met).
In sustained remission:  After full criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder were
previously met, none of the criteria for other hallucinogen use disorder have been met
at any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4,
“Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the hallucinogen,” may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment:  This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to hallucinogens is restricted.
Coding based on current severity:  Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If a hallucinogen intoxication
or another hallucinogen-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes below
for hallucinogen use disorder. Instead, the comorb id hallucinogen use disorder is indicated in
the 4th character of the hallucinogen-induced disorder code (see the coding note for halluci-
nogen intoxication or specific hallucinogen-induced mental disorder). For example, if there is
comorbid hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder and hallucinogen use disorder, only the
hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating wheth-
er the comorbid hallucinogen use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F16.159 for mild hal-
lucinogen use disorder with hallucinogen-induced  psychotic disorder or F16.259 for a
moderate or severe hallucinogen use disorder  with hallucinogen-induced psychotic disorder.
Specify current severity:
305.30 (F16.10) Mild:  Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
304.50 (F16.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
304.50 (F16.20) Severe:  Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” app lies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is
both in remission and in a controlled environm ent (i.e., in early remission in a controlled
environment or in sustained remission in a controlled environmen t). Examples of these
environments are closely supe rvised and substanc e-free jails, therapeutic communities,
and locked hospital units. 
Diagnostic Features 
Hallucinogens comprise a diverse group of subs tances that, despite ha ving different chem-
ical structures and possibly involving diffe rent molecular mechan isms, produce similar
alterations of percepti on, mood, and cognition in users. Hallucinogens included are phenyl-
alkylamines (e.g., mescaline, DOM [2,5-d imethoxy-4-methylam phetamine], and MDMA
[3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine; also called “ecstasy ”]); the indoleamines, includ-
ing psilocybin (i.e., psilocin) and dimethyltryptamine (DMT); an d the ergolines, such as LSD
(lysergic acid diethylamide) and morning glory seeds. In addition, miscellaneous other
ethnobotanical compounds are classifi ed as “hallucinogens,” of which Salvia divinorum  and
jimsonweed are two examples. Excluded from the hallucinogen group are cannabis and its
active compound, delta-9-tetrahydrocannabino l (THC) (see the section “Cannabis-Related
Disorders”). These substances can have hallucinogenic effects but are diagnosed separately
because of significant differences in their psychological and behavioral effects.
Hallucinogens are usually taken orally, al though some forms are smoked (e.g., DMT,
salvia) or (rarely) taken intranasally or by in jection (e.g., ecstasy). Duration of effects varies
Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder 525
across types of hallucinogens. Some of th ese substances (i.e., LS D, MDMA) have a long
half-life and extended duration such that us ers may spend hours to days using and/or re-
covering from the effects of these drugs. Ho wever, other hallucinogenic drugs (e.g., DMT,
salvia) are short acting. Tolerance to hallucinogens develops with repeated use and has
been reported to have both autonomic and psyc hological effects. Cros s-tolerance exists be-
tween LSD and other hallucinogens (e.g., psil ocybin, mescaline) but does not extend to
other drug categories such as amphetamines and cannabis.
MDMA/ecstasy as a hallucinogen may have distin ctive effects attributable to both its hal-
lucinogenic and its stimulant properties. Amon g heavy ecstasy users, continued use despite
physical or psychological problems, tolerance,  hazardous use, and sp ending a great deal of
time obtaining the substance are the most commonly reported criteria—over 50% in adults
and over 30% in a younger sample , while legal problems related to substance use and persis-
tent desire/inability to quit are rarely reported. As found for other substances, diagnostic cri-
teria for other hallucinogen use disorder are arrayed along a single continuum of severity. 
One of the generic criteria for substance us e disorders, a clinically significant with-
drawal syndrome, has not been consistently documented in humans, and therefore the di-
agnosis of hallucinogen withdrawal syndrome is not included in DSM-5. However, there
is evidence of withdrawal from MDMA, wi th endorsement of two or more withdrawal
symptoms observed in 59%–98% in selected samples of ecstasy users. Both psychological
and physical problems have been common ly reported as withdrawal problems. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
The characteristic symptom feat ures of some of the hallucinogens can aid in diagnosis if
urine or blood toxicology result s are not available. For exam ple, individuals who use LSD
tend to experience visual hallucinations that  can be frightening. Individuals intoxicated
with hallucinogens may exhibit a temporary increase in suicidality. 
Prevalence
Of all substance use disorders, other hallucinogen use disorder is one of the rarest. The
12-month prevalence is estimated to be 0.5% among 12- to 17-year-olds and 0.1% among
adults age 18 and older in the United States. Rates are higher in adult males (0.2%) compared
with females (0.1%), but the oppo site is observed in adolescent samples ages 12–17, in which
the 12-month rate is slightly higher in females (0 .6%) than in males (0.4%). Rates are highest in
individuals younger than 30 years, with the peak occurring in individuals ages 18–29 years
(0.6%) and decreasing to virtually 0.0% among individuals age 45 and older. 
There are marked ethnic differences in 12-mo nth prevalence of ot her hallucinogen use
disorder. Among youths ages 12–17 years, 12-month prevalence is higher among Native
Americans and Alaska Natives (1.2%) than am ong Hispanics (0.6%), whites (0.6%), Afri-
can Americans (0.2%), and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.2%). Among adults,
12-month prevalence of other hallucinogen use disorder is similar for Native Americans
and Alaska Natives, whites, and Hispanics (a ll 0.2%) but somewhat lower for Asian Amer-
icans and Pacific Islanders (0.07%) and Africa n Americans (0.03%). Past-year prevalence is
higher in clinical samples (e.g., 19% in ad olescents in treatment) . Among individuals cur-
rently using hallucinogens in the general popu lation, 7.8% (adult) to 17% (adolescent) had
a problematic pattern of use that met criteria  for past-year other hallucinogen use disorder.
Among select groups of individuals who use hallucinogens (e.g., recent heavy ecstasy
use), 73.5% of adults and 77% of adolescents have a problematic pattern of use that may
meet other hallucinogen use disorder criteria.
Development and Course
Unlike most substances where an early age at on set is associated with elevations in risk for
the corresponding use disorder, it is unclear wh ether there is an association of an early age
526 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
at onset with elevations in risk for other hallucinogen use disorder. However, patterns of
drug consumption have been found to differ by age at onset, with early-onset ecstasy users
more likely to be polydrug users than their later-onset counterpar ts. There may be a dis-
proportionate influence of use of specific hallu cinogens on risk of developing other hallu-
cinogen use disorder, with use of ecstasy/MDMA increasing the risk of the disorder
relative to use of other hallucinogens.
Little is known regarding the co urse of other hallucinogen use disorder, but it is generally
thought to have low incidence, low persistence, and high rates of recovery. Adolescents are es-
pecially at risk for using these drugs, and it is  estimated that 2.7% of youths ages 12–17 years
have used one or more of these drugs in the past 12 months, with 44 % having used ecstasy/
MDMA. Other hallucinogen use disorder is a disorder observed primarily in individuals
younger than 30 years, with rates vanishingly rare among older adults.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. In adolescents but not consistently in adults, MDMA use is associated with
an elevated rate of other hallucinogen use di sorder. Other substance use disorders, particu-
larly alcohol, tobacco, and cannabis, and major depressive disorder are associated with ele-
vated rates of other hallucino gen use disorder. Antisocial personality disorder may be
elevated among individuals who use more than two other drugs in addition to hallucinogens,
compared with their counterparts with less exte nsive use history. The influence of adult anti-
social behaviors—but not conduct disorder or antisocial personality disorder—on other hal-
lucinogen use disorder may be stronger in female s than in males. Use of specific hallucinogens
(e.g., salvia) is prominent am ong individuals ages 18–25 years with other risk-taking behaviors
and illegal activities. Cannabis use has also been implicated as a precursor to initiation of use of
hallucinogens (e.g., ecstasy), along with early use of alcohol and tobacco. Higher drug use by
peers and high sensation seeking have also been associated with elevated rates of ecstasy use.
MDMA/ecstasy use appears to signify a more severe group of hallucinogen users.
Genetic and physiological. Among male twins, total varian ce due to additive genetics
has been estimated to range from 26% to 79%, with inconsistent evidence for shared envi-
ronmental influences. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
Historically, hallucinogens have been used as part of established re ligious practices, such
as the use of peyote in the Native American Church and in Mexico. Ritual use by indige-
nous populations of psilocybin obtained from  certain types of mushrooms has occurred in
South America, Mexico, and some areas in the United States, or of ayahuasca in the Santo
Daime and União de Vegetal sects. Regular use of  peyote as part of religious rituals is not
linked to neuropsychological or psychological de ficits. For adults, no race or ethnicity dif-
ferences for the full criteria or for any indi vidual criterion are apparent at this time. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues 
In adolescents, females may be less likely th an males to endorse “hazardous use,” and fe-
male gender may be associated with increase d odds of other hallucinogen use disorder. 
Diagnostic Markers 
Laboratory testing can be useful in distin guishing among the different hallucinogens.
However, because some agents (e.g., LSD) are so potent that as little as 75 micrograms can
produce severe reactions, typical toxicologi cal examination will not always reveal which
substance has been used. 
Phencyclidine Intoxication 527
Functional Consequences of 
Other Hallucinogen Use Disorder
There is evidence for long-term neurotoxic effects of MDMA/ecstasy use, including im-
pairments in memory, psychological function , and neuroendocrine function; serotonin
system dysfunction; and sleep disturbance; as  well as adverse effects on brain microvas-
culature, white matter maturation, and damage to axons. Use of MDMA/ecstasy may di-
minish functional connectiv ity among brain regions. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other substance use disorders. The effects of hallucinogens must be distinguished from
those of other substances (e.g., amphetamines ), especially because contamination of the
hallucinogens with other dr ugs is relatively common. 
Schizophrenia. Schizophrenia also must be ruled out,  as some affected individuals (e.g.,
individuals with schizophrenia who exhibit paranoia) may falsely attribute their symp-
toms to use of hallucinogens. 
Other mental disorders or medical conditions. Other potential disorders or conditions
to consider include panic disorder, depressive  and bipolar disorders, alcohol or sedative
withdrawal, hypoglycemia and other metabolic  conditions, seizure disorder, stroke, oph-
thalmological disorder, and central nervous sy stem tumors. Careful history of drug tak-
ing, collateral reports from family and friends (if possible), age, clin ical history, physical
examination, and toxicology reports should be useful in arriving at the final diagnostic de-
cision. 
Comorbidity
Adolescents who use MDMA/ecstasy and other ha llucinogens, as well as adults who have
recently used ecstasy, have a higher preval ence of other substance use disorders compared
with nonhallucinogen substance users. Individuals who use halluc inogens exhibit eleva-
tions of nonsubstance mental disorders (espec ially anxiety, depressi ve, and bipolar disor-
ders), particularly with use of ecstasy and salvia. Rates of antisocial personality disorder (but
not conduct disorder) are significantly elevated among individuals with other hallucinogen
use disorder, as are rates of adult antisocial  behavior. However, it is unclear whether the
mental illnesses may be precursors to rather than consequences of other hallucinogen use
disorder (see the section “Risk and Prognostic Factors” for this disorder). Both adults and
adolescents who use ecstasy are mo re likely than other drug us ers to be polydrug users and
to have other drug use disorders. 
Phencyclidine Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of phencyclidine (or a pharmacologically similar substance).
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral changes (e.g., belligerence, assaultive-
ness, impulsiveness, unpredictability, psychomotor agitation, impaired judgment) that
developed during, or shortly after, phencyclidine use.
C. Within 1 hour, two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms:
Note:  When the drug is smoked, “snorted,” or  used intravenously, the onset may be
particularly rapid.
1. Vertical or horizontal nystagmus.
2. Hypertension or tachycardia.
528 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
3. Numbness or diminished responsiveness to pain.
4. Ataxia.
5. Dysarthria.
6. Muscle rigidity.
7. Seizures or coma.
8. Hyperacusis.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not better
explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another substance.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.89.  The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
there is a comorbid phencyclidine use disorder. If a mild phencyclidine use disorder is co-
morbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F16.129,  and if a moderate or severe phencyclidine use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F16.229.  If there is no comorbid phencycli-
dine use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F16.929.
Note:  In addition to the section “Functional Co nsequences of Phencyclidine Intoxication,”
see the corresponding section in phencyclidine use disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Phencyclidine intoxication reflects the clinica lly significant behavioral changes that occur
shortly after ingestion of this substance (or a pharmacologically similar substance). The
most common clinical presentations of phencyclidine intoxication include disorientation,
confusion without hallucinations, hallucination s or delusions, a catatonic-like syndrome,
and coma of varying severity. The intoxication typically last s for several hours but, de-
pending on the type of clinic al presentation and whether other drugs besides phencycli-
dine were consumed, may last for several days or longer.
Prevalence
Use of phencyclidine or related substances ma y be taken as an estimate of the prevalence
of intoxication. Approximately 2.5% of the po pulation reports having ever used phency-
clidine. Among high school students, 2.3% of  12th graders report ever using phencycli-
dine, with 57% having used in the past 12 months. This represents an increase from prior
to 2011. Past-year use of ketamine, which is assessed separately from other substances, has
remained stable over time, with about 1.7% of 12th graders reporting use.
Diagnostic Markers 
Laboratory testing may be useful, as phencycl idine is detectable in urine for up to 8 days
following use, although the levels are only weakly associated with an individual’s clinical
presentation and may therefore not be useful for case management. Creatine phosphoki-
nase and aspartate aminotransfe rase levels may be elevated.
Functional Consequences of  Phencyclidine Intoxication
Phencyclidine intoxication produces extensiv e cardiovascular and neurological (e.g., sei-
zures, dystonias, dyskinesias, catalepsy, hypothermia or hyperthermia) toxicity.
Differential Diagnosis
In particular, in the absence of intact realit y testing (i.e., without in sight into any percep-
tual abnormalities), an additional diagno sis of phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder
should be considered.
Other substance intoxication. Phencyclidine intoxication should be differentiated from
intoxication due to other su bstances, including other hallucinogens; amphetamine, co-
Other Hallucinogen Intoxication 529
caine, or other stimulants; an d anticholinergics, as well as  withdrawal from benzodiaze-
pines. Nystagmus and bizarre and violent be havior may distinguish intoxication due to
phencyclidine from that due to other substances . Toxicological tests may be useful in mak-
ing this distinction, since phencyclidine is detectable in urine for up to 8 days after use.
However, there is a weak correlation between quantitative toxicology levels of phencycli-
dine and clinical presentation that diminishes the utility of the laboratory findings for pa-
tient management. 
Other conditions. Other conditions to be considered  include schizophrenia, depression,
withdrawal from other drugs (e .g., sedatives, alcohol), cert ain metabolic disorders like hy-
poglycemia and hyponatremia, central nervous system tumors, seizur e disorders, sepsis,
neuroleptic malignant syndro me, and vascular insults.
Other Hallucinogen Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of a hallucinogen (other than phencyclidine). 
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., marked
anxiety or depression, ideas of reference, fear of “losing one’s mind,” paranoid ide-
ation, impaired judgment) that developed during, or shortly after, hallucinogen use. 
C. Perceptual changes occurring in a state of full wakefulness and alertness (e.g., sub-
jective intensification of perceptions, depersonalization, derealization, illusions, hallu-
cinations, synesthesias) that developed during, or shortly after, hallucinogen use. 
D. Two (or more) of the following signs developing during, or shortly after, hallucinogen
use: 
1. Pupillary dilation.
2. Tachycardia.
3. Sweating.
4. Palpitations.
5. Blurring of vision.
6. Tremors.
7. Incoordination.
E. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another sub-
stance.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.89.  The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
there is a comorbid hallucinogen use disorder. If a mild hallucinogen use disorder is co-
morbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F16.129,  and if a moderate or severe hallucinogen use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F16.229.  If there is no comorbid hallucinogen
use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F16.929.
Note:  For information on Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis and Culture-Related
Diagnostic Issues, see the corresponding sections in other hallucinogen use disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Other hallucinogen intoxication reflects the c linically significant behavioral or psycholog-
ical changes that occur shortly after ingestio n of a hallucinogen. Depending on the specific
hallucinogen, the intoxication may last only minutes (e.g., for salvia) or several hours or
longer (e.g., for LSD [lysergic acid diethy lamide] or MDMA [3,4-methylenedioxymetham-
phetamine]). 
530 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Prevalence
The prevalence of other hallucinogen intoxica tion may be estimated by use of those sub-
stances. In the United States, 1.8% of individuals age 12 years or older report using hallu-
cinogens in the past year. Use is more preval ent among younger individuals, with 3.1% of
12- to 17-year-olds and 7.1% of 18- to 25-year-olds using hallucinogens in the past year,
compared with only 0.7% of individuals ag e 26 years or older. Twelve-month prevalence
for hallucinogen use is more common in ma les (2.4%) than in fe males (1.2%), and even
more so among 18- to 25-year-olds (9.2% for males vs. 5.0% for females). In contrast,
among individuals ages 12–17 years, there are no gender differences (3.1% for both gen-
ders). These figures may be used as proxy es timates for gender-related differences in the
prevalence of other ha llucinogen intoxication. 
Suicide Risk
Other hallucinogen intoxication may lead to in creased suicidality, al though suicide is rare
among users of hallucinogens.
Functional Consequences of 
Other Hallucinogen  Intoxication 
Other hallucinogen intoxication can have serious consequences. The perceptual distur-
bances and impaired judgment associated wi th other hallucinogen intoxication can result
in injuries or fatalities from  automobile crashes, physical fi ghts, or unintentional self-
injury (e.g., attempts to “fly” from high plac es). Environmental factors and the personality
and expectations of the individual using the hallucinogen may contribute to the nature of
and severity of halluc inogen intoxication. Continued use of hallucinogens, particularly
MDMA, has also been linked with neurotoxic effects.
Differential Diagnosis
Other substance intoxication. Other hallucinogen intoxication  should be differentiated
from intoxication with amphetamines, cocaine,  or other stimulants; anticholinergics; in-
halants; and phencyclidine. Toxicological tests are useful in making this distinction, and
determining the route of administration may also be useful.
Other conditions. Other disorders and conditions to be considered include schizophre-
nia, depression, withdrawal from other drugs (e.g., sedatives, alcohol), certain metabolic
disorders (e.g., hypoglycemia),  seizure disorders, tumors of  the central nervous system,
and vascular insults.
Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder. Other hallucinogen intoxication is dis-
tinguished from hallucinogen persisting percep tion disorder because the symptoms in the
latter continue episodically or continuously for weeks (or long er) after the most recent in-
toxication.
Other hallucinogen-induced disorders. Other hallucinogen intoxication is distinguished
from the other hallucinogen-induced disorder s (e.g., hallucinogen- induced anxiety disor-
der, with onset during intoxication) because the symptoms in these latter disorders pre-
dominate the clinical presentation and are severe enough to warrant independent clinical
attention.
Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder 531
Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 292.89 (F16.983)
A. Following cessation of use of a hallucinogen, the reexperiencing of one or more of the
perceptual symptoms that were experienced while intoxicated with the hallucinogen
(e.g., geometric hallucinations, false perceptions of movement in the peripheral visual
fields, flashes of color, intensified colors, trails of images of moving objects, positive
afterimages, halos around objects, macropsia and micropsia).
B. The symptoms in Criterion A cause clinically significant distress or impairment in so-
cial, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. 
C. The symptoms are not attributable to another  medical condition (e.g., anatomical le-
sions and infections of the brain, visual epilepsies) and are not better explained by an-
other mental disorder (e.g., delirium, ma jor neurocognitive disorder, schizophrenia) or
hypnopompic hallucinations.
Diagnostic Features
The hallmark of hallucinogen persisting percep tion disorder is the reexperiencing, when the
individual is sober, of the pe rceptual disturbances that were  experienced while the individ-
ual was intoxicated with the hallucinogen (C riterion A). The symptoms may include any
perceptual perturbations, but visual disturbanc es tend to be predomin ant. Typical of the ab-
normal visual perceptions are geometric hallucinations, false percep tions of movement in
the peripheral visual fields, flashes of color, in tensified colors, trails of  images of moving ob-
jects (i.e., images left suspended in the path of  a moving object as seen in stroboscopic pho-
tography), perceptions of entire objects, po sitive afterimages (i.e., a same-colored or
complementary-colored “shadow” of an object remaining after removal of the object), halos
around objects, or misperception of images as  too large (macropsia) or too small (micropsia).
Duration of the visual disturbances may be ep isodic or nearly continuous and must cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas
of functioning (Criterion B). The disturbances may last for weeks, months, or years. Other
explanations for the disturbances (e.g., brain lesions, preexisting psychosis, seizure disor-
ders, migraine aura without headaches) must be ruled out (Criterion C).
Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder  occurs primarily after LSD (lysergic acid
diethylamide) use, but not exclusively. There does not appear to be a strong correlation be-
tween hallucinogen persisting perception disord er and number of occasions of hallucino-
gen use, with some instances of hallucinogen  persisting perception disorder occurring in
individuals with minimal exposure to hallucinogens. Some instances of hallucinogen per-
sisting perception disorder may be triggered by use of other substa nces (e.g., cannabis or
alcohol) or in adaptation to dark environments.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Reality testing remains intact in individuals with hallucinogen persisting perception dis-
order (i.e., the individual is aware that the disturbance is linked to the effect of the drug).
If this is not the case, another disorder might better explain the abnormal perceptions.
Prevalence
Prevalence estimates of hallucinogen persisting perception disorder are unknown. Initial
prevalence estimates of the disorder among individuals who use hallucinogens is approx-
imately 4.2%. 
532 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Development and Course
Little is known about the development of hallucinogen persisting perception disorder. Its
course, as suggested by its name, is persistent, lasting for weeks, months, or even years in
certain individuals. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
There is little evidence regarding risk factor s for hallucinogen persisting perception dis-
order, although genetic factors have been suggested as a possible explanation underlying
the susceptibility to LSD effects in this condition. 
Functional Consequences of 
Hallucinogen Persisting  Perception Disorder
Although hallucinogen persisting perception  disorder remains a chronic condition in
some cases, many individuals with the disord er are able to suppres s the disturbances and
continue to function normally. 
Differential Diagnosis
Conditions to be ruled out include schizophrenia, other drug  effects, neurodegenerative
disorders, stroke, brain tumors, infections, an d head trauma. Neuroimaging results in hal-
lucinogen persisting perception disorder cases are typically negative. As noted earlier, re-
ality testing remains intact (i.e., the individual is aware that the disturbance is linked to the
effect of the drug); if this is not the case, another disorder (e.g., psychotic disorder, another
medical condition) might better ex plain the abnormal perceptions. 
Comorbidity
Common comorbid mental disorders accomp anying hallucinogen persisting perception
disorder are panic disorder , alcohol use disorder, and major depressive disorder. 
Other Phencyclidine-Induced Disorders
Other phencyclidine-induced diso rders are described in other chapters of the manual with
disorders with which they share phenomeno logy (see the substance/medication-induced
mental disorders in these chap ters): phencyclidine-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizo-
phrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disord ers”); phencyclidine-induced bipolar dis-
order (“Bipolar and Related Disorders”); phencyclidine-induced depressive disorder
(“Depressive Disorders”); and phencyclidin e-induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiety Disor-
ders”). For phencyclidine-induced intoxication delirium, see the criteria and discussion of
delirium in the chapter “Neurocognitive Di sorders.” These phencyclidine-induced disor-
ders are diagnosed instead of phencyclidine in toxication only when the symptoms are suf-
ficiently severe to warrant in dependent clinical attention. 
Other Hallucinogen-Induced Disorders
The following other hallucinogen- induced disorders are describe d in other chapters of the
manual with disorder s with which they share phenome nology (see the substance/medi-
cation-induced mental disorders in these chapters): other hallucinogen–induced psychotic
disorder (“Schizophrenia Spect rum and Other Psychotic Diso rders”); other hallucinogen–
induced bipolar disorder (“Bi polar and Related Disorders”); other hallucinogen–induced
Unspecified Phencyclidine-Related Disorder 533
depressive disorder (“Depressive Disorders” ); and other hallucinogen–induced anxiety
disorder (“Anxiety Disorders”). For other hallu cinogen intoxication delirium, see the cri-
teria and discussion of delirium in the chapter “Neurocognitive Di sorders.” These hallu-
cinogen-induced disorders are diagnosed inst ead of other hallucinogen intoxication only
when the symptoms are sufficiently severe to warrant independent clinical attention. 
Unspecified Phencyclidine-Related Disorder
292.9 (F16.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a phencycli-
dine-related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, oc-
cupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full
criteria for any specific phencyclidine-related disorder or any of the disorders in the sub-
stance-related and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
Unspecified Hallucinogen-Related Disorder
292.9 (F16.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a hallucinogen-
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any specific hallucinogen-related disorder or any of the disorders in the substance-
related and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
Inhalant-Related Disorders
Inhalant Use Disorder
Inhalant Intoxication
Other Inhalant-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Inhalant-Related Disorder
Inhalant Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. A problematic pattern of use of a hydrocarbon-based inhalant substance leading to
clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the follow-
ing, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. The inhalant substance is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than
was intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control use of the
inhalant substance.
534 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the inhalant substance,
use it, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the inhalant substance.
5. Recurrent use of the inhalant substance resulting in a failure to fulfill major role ob-
ligations at work, school, or home.
6. Continued use of the inhalant substance des pite having persistent or recurrent so-
cial or interpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of its use.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreat ional activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of use of the inhalant substance.
8. Recurrent use of the inhalant substance in situations in which it is physically haz-
ardous.
9. Use of the inhalant substance is continued despite knowledge of having a persis-
tent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been
caused or exacerbated by the substance.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: 
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the inhalant substance to achieve
intoxication or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the in-
halant substance.
Specify the particular inhalant: When possible, the particular substance involved should
be named (e.g., “solvent use disorder”).
Specify if:
In early remission:  After full criteria for inhalant use disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria for inhalant use disor der have been met for at least 3 months but
for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong de-
sire or urge to use the inhalant substance,” may be met).
In sustained remission: After full criteria for inhalant use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for inhalant use disorder have been met at any time during a
period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a
strong desire or urge to use the inhalant substance,” may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment:  This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to inhalant substances is restricted. 
Coding based on current severity:  Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If an inhalant intoxication
or another inhalant-induced mental disorder is also present, do not use the codes below
for inhalant use disorder. Instead, the comorbid inhalant use disorder is indicated in the
4th character of the inhalant-induced disorder code (see the coding note for inhalant intox-
ication or a specific inhalant-induced mental di sorder). For example, if there is comorbid
inhalant-induced depressive disorder and i nhalant use disorder, only the inhalant-induced
depressive disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid
inhalant use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F18.14 for mild inhalant use disorder
with inhalant-induced depressive disorder or F 18.24 for a moderate or severe inhalant use
disorder with inhalant-induced depressive disorder.
Specify current severity:
305.90 (F18.10) Mild:  Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
304.60 (F18.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
304.60 (F18.20) Severe:  Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
Inhalant Use Disorder 535
Specifiers
This manual recognizes volatile hydrocarbon use meeting the above diagnostic criteria as
inhalant use disorder. Volatile hydrocarbons are toxic gases from glues, fuels, paints, and
other volatile compounds. When possible, th e particular substance involved should be
named (e.g., “toluene use disorder”). However, most compounds that are inhaled are a
mixture of several substances that can produce psychoactive effects, and it is often difficult
to ascertain the exact substance responsible fo r the disorder. Unless there is clear evidence
that a single, unmixed substance has been used , the general term inhalant should be used
in recording the diagnosis. Disorders arising from inhalation of nitrous oxide or of amyl-,
butyl-, or isobutylnitrite are considered as other (or unkn own) substance use disorder. 
“In a controlled environment” applies as a fu rther specifier of remission if the individ-
ual is both in remission and in a controlled en vironment (i.e., in early remission in a con-
trolled environment or in su stained remission in a contro lled environment). Examples of
these environments are closely supervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communi-
ties, and locked hospital units. 
The severity of individuals’ inhalant use di sorder is assessed by the number of diag-
nostic criteria endorsed. Changing severity of individuals’ inhalant use disorder across
time is reflected by reductions in the frequency (e.g., days used per month) and/or dose
(e.g., tubes of glue per day) used, as assessed by the individual’s self-report, report of oth-
ers, clinician’s observations, and bi ological testing (when practical).
Diagnostic Features
Features of inhalant use disorder include repe ated use of an inhalant substance despite the
individual’s knowing that the substance is causing serious problems for the individual
(Criterion A9). Those problems are re flected in the diagnostic criteria. 
Missing work or school or inability to perform typical responsibilities at work or school
(Criterion A5), and continued us e of the inhalant substance even though it causes arguments
with family or friends, fights, and other social  or interpersonal proble ms (Criterion A6), may
be seen in inhalant use disorder. Limiting family contact, work or school obligations, or rec-
reational activities (e.g., sports , games, hobbies) may also occu r (Criterion A7). Use of inhal-
ants when driving or operating dangerous equipment (Criterion A8) is also seen.
Tolerance (Criterion A10) and mild withdraw al are each reported by about 10% of in-
dividuals who use inhalants, and a few individuals use inhalants to avoid withdrawal.
However, because the withdrawal symptoms ar e mild, this manual neither recognizes a
diagnosis of inhalant withdrawal nor counts withdrawal complaints as a diagnostic crite-
rion for inhalant use disorder. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A diagnosis of inhalant use disorder is suppo rted by recurring epis odes of intoxication
with negative results in standard drug screens (which do not detect inhalants); possession,
or lingering odors, of inhalant substances; peri-oral or peri-nasal “glue-sniffer’s rash”; as-
sociation with other individuals known to use inhalants; membership in groups with prev-
alent inhalant use (e.g., some native or abor iginal communities, ho meless children in street
gangs); easy access to certain inhalant substances; paraphernalia possession; presence of
the disorder’s characteristic medical compli cations (e.g., brain white matter pathology,
rhabdomyolysis); and the presence of multiple  substance use disorders. Inhalant use and
inhalant use disorder are asso ciated with past suicide atte mpts, especially among adults
reporting previous episodes of low mood or anhedonia.
Prevalence
About 0.4% of Americans ages 12–17 years have a pattern of use that me ets criteria for in-
halant use disorder in the past 12 months. Among those youths, the prevalence is highest
536 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
in Native Americans and lowest in African Americans. Prevalence falls to about 0.1% among
Americans ages 18–29 years, and only 0.02% when all Americans 18 years or older are con-
sidered, with almost no females and a prepon derance of European Am ericans. Of course,
in isolated subgroups, prevalence may di ffer considerably from  these overall rates. 
Development and Course
About 10% of 13-year-old American children re port having used inhalants at least once;
that percentage remains stable through age 17 years. Among those 12- to 17-year-olds who
use inhalants, the more-used substances includ e glue, shoe polish, or toluene; gasoline or
lighter fluid; or spray paints. 
Only 0.4% of 12- to 17-year-olds progress to  inhalant use disorder; those youths tend to
exhibit multiple other problems. The declining prevalence of inhalant use disorder after
adolescence indicates that this disorder  usually remits in early adulthood.
Volatile hydrocarbon use disorder is rare in prepubertal children, most common in ad-
olescents and young adults, and uncommon in older persons. Calls to poison-control cen-
ters for “intentional abuse” of inhalants peak with calls involving individuals at age 14 years.
Of adolescents who use inhalants, perhaps on e-fifth develop inhalant use disorder; a few
die from inhalant-related accide nts, or “sudden sniffing death”. But the disorder apparently
remits in many individuals after adolescence.  Prevalence declines dramatically among in-
dividuals in their 20s. Those with inhalant use disorder extending into adulthood often
have severe problems: substance use disorder s, antisocial personality disorder, and sui-
cidal ideation with attempts. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Predictors of progression from nonuse of inhalant s, to use, to inhalant
use disorder include comorbid non-inhalant substance use disorders and either conduct
disorder or antisocial personality disorder. Other predictors are ea rlier onset of inhalant
use and prior use of mental health services. 
Environmental. Inhalant gases are widely and legally available, increasing the risk of mis-
use. Childhood maltreatment or  trauma also is associated with youthful progression from
inhalant non-use to inhalant use disorder. 
Genetic and physiological. Behavioral disinhibition  is a highly heritable general propensity
to not constrain behavior in socially acceptable  ways, to break social norms and rules, and to
take dangerous risks, pursuing rewards excessi vely despite dangers of  adverse consequences.
Youths with strong behavioral disinhibition show  risk factors for inhala nt use disorder: early-
onset substance use disorder, multiple substa nce involvement, and ea rly conduct problems.
Because behavioral disinhibition is under stro ng genetic influence, youths in families with
substance and antisocial problems are at elevated risk for i nhalant use disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Certain native or aboriginal communities have  experienced a high prevalence of inhalant
problems. Also, in some countr ies, groups of homeless children in street gangs have ex-
tensive inhalant use problems.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Although the prevalence of inhalant use disord er is almost identical in adolescent males
and females, the disorder is very rare among adult females.
Diagnostic Markers
Urine, breath, or saliva tests may be valuable  for assessing concurrent use of non-inhalant
substances by individuals with inhalant us e disorder. However, technical problems and
Inhalant Use Disorder 537
the considerable expense of analyses make fr equent biological testing for inhalants them-
selves impractical.
Functional Consequences of  Inhalant Use Disorder 
Because of inherent toxicity, use of butane or  propane is not infrequently fatal. Moreover,
any inhaled volatile hydrocarbons may produc e “sudden sniffing death” from cardiac ar-
rhythmia. Fatalities may occur even on the first inhalant exposure and are not thought to
be dose-related. Volatile hydrocarbon use impairs neurobehavioral function and causes
various neurological, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and pulmonary problems. 
Long-term inhalant users are at increased risk for tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS, sexually
transmitted diseases, depression , anxiety, bronchitis, asthma , and sinusitis. Deaths may
occur from respiratory depression, arrhythmia s, asphyxiation, aspiration of vomitus, or
accident and injury.
Differential Diagnosis
Inhalant exposure (unintentional) from industrial or other accidents. This designation
is used when findings suggest repeated or continuous inhalant exposure but the involved
individual and other informants deny an y history of purposeful inhalant use.
Inhalant use (intentional), without meeting criteria for inhalant use disorder. Inhalant use
is common among adolescents, but for most of th ose individuals, the inhalant use does not
meet the diagnostic standard of two or more Criterion A items for i nhalant use disorder in
the past year.
Inhalant intoxication, without meeting criteria for inhalant use disorder. Inhalant intox-
ication occurs frequently duri ng inhalant use disorder but also may occur among individ-
uals whose use does not meet criteria for inha lant use disorder, which requires at least two
of the 10 diagnostic criteria in the past year.
Inhalant-induced disorders (i .e., inhalant-induced psychotic disorder, depressive dis-
order, anxiety disorder, neurocognitive disorder, other inhalant-induced disorders)
without meeting criteria for inhalant use disorder. Criteria are met for a psychotic, de-
pressive, anxiety, or major neurocognitive disorder, and there is evidence from history,
physical examination, or laboratory findings that the deficits are etiologically related to
the effects of inhalant substances. Yet, criter ia for inhalant use disorder may not be met
(i.e., fewer than 2 of the 10 criteria were present).
Other substance use disorders, especially those involving sedating substances (e.g.,
alcohol, benzodiazepines, barbiturates). Inhalant use disorder commonly co-occurs
with other substance use disorders, and the sy mptoms of the disorders may be similar and
overlapping. To disentangle symptom patterns, it is helpful to inquire about which symp-
toms persisted during periods when some of the substances were not being used.
Other toxic, metabolic, traumatic, neoplastic, or infectious disorders impairing central or
peripheral nervous system function. Individuals with inhalant use disorder may pre-
sent with symptoms of pernicious anemia, su bacute combined degeneration of the spinal
cord, psychosis, major or minor cognitive d isorder, brain atrophy, leukoencephalopathy,
and many other nervous system  disorders. Of co urse, these disorder s also may occur in
the absence of inhalant use disorder. A history of little or no inhalant use helps to exclude
inhalant use disorder as the source of these problems.
Disorders of other organ systems. Individuals with inhalant use disorder may present
with symptoms of hepatic or renal damage, rhabdomyolysis, methemoglobinemia, or symp-
toms of other gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, or  pulmonary diseases. A history of little or no
inhalant use helps to exclude inhalant use diso rder as the source of such medical problems.
538 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Comorbidity
Individuals with inhalant use disorder receiv ing clinical care often have numerous other
substance use disorders. Inhalant use disord er commonly co-occurs with adolescent con-
duct disorder and adult antisocial personality disorder. Adult inhalant use and inhalant
use disorder also are strongly associated wi th suicidal ideation and suicide attempts.
Inhalant Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent intended or unintended short-term, high-dose exposure to inhalant sub-
stances, including volatile hydrocarbons such as toluene or gasoline.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., belliger-
ence, assaultiveness, apathy, impaired judgment ) that developed during, or shortly af-
ter, exposure to inhalants.
C. Two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly after,
inhalant use or exposure:
1. Dizziness.
2. Nystagmus.
3. Incoordination.
4. Slurred speech.
5. Unsteady gait.
6. Lethargy.
7. Depressed reflexes.
8. Psychomotor retardation.
9. Tremor.
10. Generalized muscle weakness.
11. Blurred vision or diplopia.
12. Stupor or coma.
13. Euphoria.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not bet-
ter explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another substance.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.89.  The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
there is a comorbid inhalant use disorder. If a mild inhalant use disorder is comorbid, the
ICD-10-CM code is F18.129,  and if a moderate or severe inhalant use disorder is comor-
bid, the ICD-10-CM code is F18.229.  If there is no comorbid inhalant use disorder, then
the ICD-10-CM code is F18.929.
Note:  For information on Developm ent and Course, Risk and Prognostic Factors, Culture-
Related Diagnostic Issues, and Diagnostic Markers, see the co rresponding sections in in-
halant use disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Inhalant intoxication is an inhalant-related, cl inically significant mental disorder that de-
velops during, or immediately after, intended or unintended inhalation of a volatile hy-
drocarbon substance. Volatile hydrocarbons are toxic gases fr om glues, fuels, paints, and
other volatile compounds. When it is possible to do so, the particular substance involved
should be named (e.g., toluene intoxication).  Among those who do, the intoxication clears
within a few minutes to a few hours after th e exposure ends. Thus, inhalant intoxication
usually occurs in brief episodes that may recur.
Inhalant Intoxication 539
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Inhalant intoxication may be indicated by eviden ce of possession, or lingering odors, of in-
halant substances (e.g., glue, paint thinner, gasoline, butane lighters); apparent intoxica-
tion occurring in the age range with the highest prevalence of inhalant use (12–17 years);
and apparent intoxication with negative results from the standard drug screens that usu-
ally fail to identify inhalants.
Prevalence
The prevalence of actual episode s of inhalant intoxication in the general population is un-
known, but it is probable that most inhalant users would at some time exhibit use that
would meet criteria for inhalant intoxication disorder. Therefore, the prevalence of inhal-
ant use and the prevalence of inhalant intoxi cation disorder are likely similar. In 2009 and
2010, inhalant use in the past year was reported by 0.8% of all Americans older than 12 years;
the prevalence was highest in younger age groups (3.6% for individuals 12 to 17 years old,
and 1.7% for individuals 18 to 25 years old).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Gender differences in the prevalence of inhalant intoxication in the general population are
unknown. However, if it is assumed that most inhalant users eventually experience inhal-
ant intoxication, gender differences  in the prevalence of inhalant users  likely approximate
those in the proportions of males and females experiencing inhalant intoxication. Regard-
ing gender differences in the pr evalence of inhalant users in the United States, 1% of males
older than 12 years and 0.7% of females older than 12 years have used inhalants in the pre-
vious year, but in the younger age groups more  females than males have used inhalants
(e.g., among 12- to 17-year-olds, 3. 6% of males and 4.2% of females).
Functional Consequences of Inhalant Intoxication
Use of inhaled substances in a closed container, such as a plastic bag over the head, may
lead to unconsciousness, anoxia, and death.  Separately, “sudden sniffing death,” likely
from cardiac arrhythmia or arrest, may occu r with various volatile inhalants. The en-
hanced toxicity of certain vola tile inhalants, such as butane or propane, also causes fatal-
ities. Although inhalant intoxication itself is of short duration, it may produce persisting
medical and neurological problems, especi ally if the intoxications are frequent. 
Differential Diagnosis
Inhalant exposure, without meeting the criteria for inhalant intoxication disorder.
The individual intentionally or unintentionally inhaled substances, but the dose was in-
sufficient for the diagnostic criteria for inhalant use disorder to be met.
Intoxication and other substance/medica tion-induced disorders from other sub-
stances, especially from sedating substances (e.g., alcohol, benzodiazepines, barbi-
turates). These disorders may have similar signs and symptoms, but the intoxication is
attributable to other intoxicants that may be identified via a toxicology sc reen. Differenti-
ating the source of the intoxication may invo lve discerning evidence of inhalant exposure
as described for inhalant use disorder. A diag nosis of inhalant intoxication may be sug-
gested by possession, or linger ing odors, of inhalant substances (e.g., glue, paint thinner,
gasoline, butane lighters,); paraphernalia poss ession (e.g., rags or bags for concentrating
glue fumes); perioral or perinasal “glue-sniffe r’s rash”; reports from family or friends that
the intoxicated individual possesses or uses inhalants; apparent intoxication despite neg-
ative results on standard drug screens (which usually fail to identify inhalants); apparent
intoxication occurring in that age range with the highest prevalence of inhalant use (12–17
540 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
years); association with others known to use inhalants; membership in certain small com-
munities with prevalent inhalant use (e.g., so me native or aborigin al communities, home-
less street children and adoles cents); or unusual access to certain inhalant substances.
Other inhalant-related disorders. Episodes of inhalant intoxication do occur during,
but are not identical with, other inhalant-related  disorders. Those inha lant-related disorders
are recognized by their respective diagnostic  criteria: inhalant use disorder, inhalant-
induced neurocognitive disorder, inhalant-i nduced psychotic disorder, inhalant-induced
depressive disorder, inhalant-induced anxiet y disorder, and other inhalant-induced dis-
orders.
Other toxic, metabolic, traumatic, neoplastic, or infectious disorders that impair brain
function and cognition. Numerous neurological and other medical conditions may pro-
duce the clinically significant behavioral or  psychological changes (e.g., belligerence, as-
saultiveness, apathy, impaired judgment) that also characterize inhalant intoxication. 
Other Inhalant-Induced Disorders
The following inhalant-induced  disorders are described in other chapters of the manual
with disorders with which they share ph enomenology (see the substance/medication-
induced mental disorders in these chapters): inhalant-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizo-
phrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disord ers”); inhalant-induced depressive disorder
(“Depressive Disorders”); inhalant-induced an xiety disorder (“Anxiet y Disorders”); and in-
halant-induced major or mild neurocognitive disorder (“Neur ocognitive Disorders”). For
inhalant intoxication delirium, see the criteria and discussion of de lirium in the chapter
“Neurocognitive Disorders.” Thes e inhalant-induced disorders are diagnosed instead of in-
halant intoxication only when symptoms are sufficiently severe to  warrant independent
clinical attention. 
Unspecified Inhalant-Related Disorder
292.9 (F18.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of an inhalant-
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any specific inhalant-related disorder or any  of the disorders in the substance-related
and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
Opioid-Related Disorders
Opioid Use Disorder
Opioid Intoxication
Opioid Withdrawal
Other Opioid-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Opioid -Related Disorder
Opioid Use Disorder 541
Opioid Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A problematic pattern of opioid use leading to clinically significant impairment or distress,
as manifested by at least two of the fo llowing, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. Opioids are often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was in-
tended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control opioid use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the opioid, use the opi-
oid, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use opioids.
5. Recurrent opioid use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work,
school, or home.
6. Continued opioid use despite having persisten t or recurrent social or interpersonal
problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of opioids.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreat ional activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of opioid use.
8. Recurrent opioid use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
9. Continued opioid use despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent physi-
cal or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by
the substance.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: 
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of opioids to achieve intoxication or de-
sired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of an opioid.
Note:  This criterion is not considered to be met for those taking opioids solely under
appropriate medical supervision.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic opioid withdrawal syndr ome (refer to Criteria A and B of the
criteria set for opioid withdrawal, pp. 547–548).
b. Opioids (or a closely related substance) are taken to relieve or avoid withdrawal
symptoms.
Note:  This criterion is not considered to be met for those individuals taking opioids
solely under appropriate medical supervision.
Specify if:
In early remission: After full criteria for opioid use disorder were previously met, none
of the criteria for opioid use disorder have been met for at least 3 months but for less
than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or
urge to use opioids,” may be met).
In sustained remission:  After full criteria for opioid us e disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria for opioid use disorder have been met at any time during a period
of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong de-
sire or urge to use opioids,” may be met). 
Specify if:
On maintenance therapy:  This additional specifier is used if the individual is taking a
prescribed agonist medication such as  methadone or buprenorphine and none of the
criteria for opioid use disorder have been met for that class of medication (except tol-
erance to, or withdrawal from, the agonist). This category also applies to those individ-
542 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
uals being maintained on a partial agonist, an agonist/antagonist, or a full antagonist
such as oral naltrexone or depot naltrexone. 
In a controlled environment:  This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to opioids is restricted.
Coding based on current severity:  Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If an opioid intoxication,
opioid withdrawal, or another opioid-induced ment al disorder is also present, do not use
the codes below for opioid use disorder. Instead, the comorbid opioid use disorder is indi-
cated in the 4th character of the opioid-indu ced disorder code (see the coding note for opi-
oid intoxication, opioid withdrawal, or a spec ific opioid-induced mental disorder). For
example, if there is comorbid opioid-induc ed depressive disorder and opioid use disorder,
only the opioid-induced depressive disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating
whether the comorbid opioid use disorder is mi ld, moderate, or severe: F11.14 for mild opi-
oid use disorder with opioid-induced depressive disorder or F11.24 for a moderate or se-
vere opioid use disorder with opi oid-induced depressive disorder.
Specify current severity:
305.50 (F11.10) Mild:  Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
304.00 (F11.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
304.00 (F11.20) Severe:  Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
Specifiers
The “on maintenance therapy” specifier applies as a further specifier of remission if the in-
dividual is both in remission and receiving maintenance therapy. “In a controlled environ-
ment” applies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is both in remission and in
a controlled environment (i.e., in  early remission in a controlled environment or in sustained
remission in a controlled envi ronment). Examples of these en vironments are closely super-
vised and substance-free jail s, therapeutic communities, an d locked hospital units. 
Changing severity across time in an individual  is also reflected by reductions in the fre-
quency (e.g., days of use per month) and/or dose (e.g., injections or number of pills) of an
opioid, as assessed by the individual’s self-r eport, report of knowledgeable others, clini-
cian’s observations, and biological testing.
Diagnostic Features
Opioid use disorder includes signs and sympto ms that reflect compulsive, prolonged self-
administration of opioid substances that are used for no legitimate medical purpose or, if
another medical condition is pres ent that requires opioid treatment, that are used in doses
greatly in excess of the amount needed for th at medical condition. (F or example, an indi-
vidual prescribed analgesic opioids for pain re lief at adequate dosing will use significantly
more than prescribed and not only because of persistent pain.) Individuals with opioid use
disorder tend to develop such regular patterns of compulsive drug use that daily activities
are planned around obtaining and administer ing opioids. Opioids are usually purchased
on the illegal market but may also be obtained  from physicians by falsifying or exagger-
ating general medical problems or by receiv ing simultaneous prescr iptions from several
physicians. Health care professionals with op ioid use disorder will often obtain opioids by
writing prescriptions for themselves or by dive rting opioids that have been prescribed for
patients or from pharmacy supplies. Most individuals with opioid use disorder have
significant levels of tolerance and will experience withdrawal on abrupt discontinuation
of opioid substances. Individuals with opio id use disorder ofte n develop conditioned
responses to drug-related stimuli (e.g., cr aving on seeing any he roin powder–like sub-
stance)—a phenomenon that occu rs with most drugs that cause intense psychological
changes. These responses probably contribute to relapse, are difficult to extinguish, and typ-
ically persist long after detoxification is completed.
Opioid Use Disorder 543
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Opioid use disorder can be asso ciated with a history of drug-r elated crimes (e.g., posses-
sion or distribution of drugs, forgery, burglary, robbery, larc eny, receiving stolen goods).
Among health care professionals and individuals who have ready access to controlled
substances, there is often a different pattern of illegal activities involving problems with
state licensing boards, professional staffs of hospitals, or other administrative agencies.
Marital difficulties (including divorce), un employment, and irregular employment are of-
ten associated with opioid use diso rder at all socioeconomic levels.
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalence of opioid use disord er is approximately 0. 37% among adults age
18 years and older in the community population. This may be an underestimate because of
the large number of incarcerated individuals wi th opioid use disorders. Rates are higher in
males than in females (0.49% vs. 0.26%), with the male-to-female ratio typically being 1.5:1
for opioids other than heroin (i.e., available by prescription) and 3:1 for heroin. Female ad-
olescents may have a higher likelihood of developing opioid use disorders. The preva-
lence decreases with age, with the prevalence  highest (0.82%) among adults age 29 years or
younger, and decreasing to 0.09% among adul ts age 65 years and older. Among adults, the
prevalence of opioid use di sorder is lower among African Americans at 0.18% and over-
represented among Native Americans at 1.25%. It is close to average among whites (0.38%),
Asian or Pacific Islanders (0.35%), and Hispanics (0.39%).
Among individuals in the United States ages 12–17 years, the overall 12-month prev-
alence of opioid use disorder in the community population is approximately 1.0%, but the
prevalence of heroin use disorder is less than 0.1%. By contrast, analgesic use disorder is
prevalent in about 1.0% of those ages 12–17 years, speaking to the importance of opioid an-
algesics as a group of substances with significant health consequences.
The 12-month prevalence of problem opioid use in European countries in the commu-
nity population ages 15–64 years is betwee n 0.1% and 0.8%. The average prevalence of
problem opioid use in the European Unio n and Norway is between 0.36% and 0.44%.
Development and Course
Opioid use disorder can begin at any age, bu t problems associated with opioid use are
most commonly first observed in the late teens or early 20s. Once opioid use disorder
develops, it usually continues over a period of many years,  even though brief periods of
abstinence are frequent. In treated populati ons, relapse following abstinence is common.
Even though relapses do occur, and while so me long-term mortality rates may be as high
as 2% per year, about 20%–30% of individuals with opioid use disorder achieve long-term
abstinence. An exception concerns that of military service perso nnel who became depen-
dent on opioids in Vietnam; over 90% of this population who had been dependent on opi-
oids during deployment in Vietnam achieved  abstinence after they returned, but they
experienced increased rates of alcohol or amph etamine use disorder as  well as increased
suicidality.
Increasing age is associated with a decrease in  prevalence as a result of early mortality
and the remission of sy mptoms after age 40 years (i.e., “maturing out”). However, many
individuals continue have presentations that m eet opioid use disorder  criteria for decades.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Genetic and physiological. The risk for opiate use disorder can be related to individual,
family, peer, and social environmental factors,  but within these domains, genetic factors
play a particularly important role both dire ctly and indirectly. For instance, impulsivity
and novelty seeking are individu al temperaments that relate to the propensity to develop
544 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
a substance use disorder but may themselves be genetically determined. Peer factors may
relate to genetic predisposition in terms of how an individual selects his or her environ-
ment. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Despite small variations regarding individual criterion items, opioid use disorder diag-
nostic criteria perform equally well across most race/ethnicity groups. Individuals from
ethnic minority populations living in econom ically deprived area s have been overrep-
resented among individuals with opioid use disorder. However, over time, opioid use
disorder is seen more often among white middle-class individuals, especially females,
suggesting that differences in use reflect the availability of opioid drugs and that other so-
cial factors may impact prevalence. Medical personnel who have ready access to opioids
may be at increased risk for opioid use disorder. 
Diagnostic Markers
Routine urine toxicology test re sults are often positive for opioid drugs in individuals with
opioid use disorder. Urine test results remain positive for most opioids (e.g., heroin, mor-
phine, codeine, oxycodone, propoxyphene) for 12–36 hours after administration. Fentanyl
is not detected by standard urine tests but can be identified by more specialized proce-
dures for several days. Methadone, buprenorphine (or buprenorphine/naloxone combi-
nation), and LAAM ( L-alpha-acetylmethadol) have to be specifically tested for and will not
cause a positive result on routine tests for opiates. They can be detected for several days up
to more than 1 week. Laboratory evidence of the presence of other substances (e.g., co-
caine, marijuana, alcohol, amphetamines, benzodiazepines) is common . Screening test re-
sults for hepatitis A, B, and C virus are positive in as many as 80%–90% of injection opioid
users, either for hepatitis antigen (signifying ac tive infection) or for hepatitis antibody (sig-
nifying past infection). HIV is prevalent in injection opioid users as well. Mildly elevated
liver function test results are common, either as a result of re solving hepatitis or from toxic
injury to the liver due to contaminants that have been mixed with the injected opioid. Sub-
tle changes in cortisol secretion patterns and body temperature regulation have been ob-
served for up to 6 months following opioid detoxification.
Suicide Risk
Similar to the risk generally observed for a ll substance use disorders, opioid use disorder
is associated with a heightened  risk for suicide attempts and completed suicides. Particu-
larly notable are both accidental  and deliberate opioid overdose s. Some suicide risk factors
overlap with risk factors for an opioid use di sorder. In addition, repeated opioid intoxica-
tion or withdrawal may be associated with severe depressions that, although temporary,
can be intense enough to lead to suicide attempts and completed su icides. Available data
suggest that nonfatal accidental opioid ov erdose (which is common) and attempted sui-
cide are distinct clinically significant proble ms that should not be mistaken for each other.
Functional Consequences of Opioid Use Disorder
Opioid use is associated with a lack of mu cous membrane secretions, causing dry mouth
and nose. Slowing of gastrointestinal activity  and a decrease in gut motility can produce
severe constipation. Visual acuity may be im paired as a result of pupillary constriction
with acute administration. In individuals who inject opioids, sclerosed veins (“tracks”)
and puncture marks on the lower portions of the upper extremities are common. Veins
sometimes become so severely sclerosed that peripheral edema develops, and individuals
switch to injecting in veins in the legs, neck , or groin. When these veins become unusable,
individuals often inject directly into their su bcutaneous tissue (“sk in-popping”), resulting
Opioid Use Disorder 545
in cellulitis, abscesses, and circ ular-appearing scars from healed skin lesions. Tetanus and
Clostridium botulinum  infections are relatively rare bu t extremely serious consequences of
injecting opioids, especially with contaminated  needles. Infections may also occur in other
organs and include bacterial endocarditis, hepa titis, and HIV infection. Hepatitis C infec-
tions, for example, may occur in up to 90% of  persons who inject opioids. In addition, the
prevalence of HIV infection ca n be high among individuals who inject drugs, a large pro-
portion of whom are individuals with opioid  use disorder. HIV infection rates have been
reported to be as high as 60% among heroin users with opioid use disorder in some areas
of the United States or the Russian Federati on. However, the incidence may also be 10% or
less in other areas, especially those where a ccess to clean injection material and parapher-
nalia is facilitated.
Tuberculosis is a particularly serious problem among individuals who use drugs in-
travenously, especially those who are dependen t on heroin; infection is usually asymptom-
atic and evident only by the presence of a posi tive tuberculin skin test. However, many cases
of active tuberculosis have been found, espe cially among those who are infected with HIV.
These individuals often have a newly acquired infection but also are likely to experience
reactivation of a prior infection be cause of impaired immune function. 
Individuals who sniff heroin or other opioid s into the nose (“snorting”) often develop
irritation of the nasal mucosa, sometimes acco mpanied by perforation of the nasal septum.
Difficulties in sexual functioning are common. Males often experience erectile dysfunction
during intoxication or chronic use. Female s commonly have disturbances of reproductive
function and irregular menses.
In relation to infections such as cellulitis, hepatitis, HIV infection, tuberculosis, and en-
docarditis, opioid use d isorder is associated with a mort ality rate as high as 1.5%–2% per
year. Death most often results from overdose, accidents, injuries, AIDS, or other general
medical complications. Accidents and injuries due to violence that is associated with buy-
ing or selling drugs are common. In some areas,  violence accounts for more opioid-related
deaths than overdose or HIV infection. Phy siological dependence on opioids may occur in
about half of the infants born to females with opioid use disorder; this can produce a se-
vere withdrawal syndrome requiring medical treatment. Although low birth weight is
also seen in children of mothers with opioid  use disorder, it is usually not marked and is
generally not associated with serious adverse consequences.
Differential Diagnosis
Opioid-induced mental disorders. Opioid-induced disorders o ccur frequently in individ-
uals with opioid use disorder. Opioid-induced  disorders may be characterized by symptoms
(e.g., depressed mood) that rese mble primary mental disorders (e.g., persistent depressive dis-
order [dysthymia] vs. opioid-induced depressive disorder, with depressive features, with on-
set during intoxication). Opioids are less likel y to produce symptoms of mental disturbance
than are most other drug s of abuse. Opioid intoxication and opioid withdrawal are distin-
guished from the other opioid-induced disorder s (e.g., opioid-induced  depressive disorder,
with onset during intoxication ) because the symptoms in thes e latter disorders predominate
the clinical presentation and are severe enou gh to warrant independent clinical attention.
Other substance intoxication. Alcohol intoxication and seda tive, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
intoxication can cause a clinical picture that resembles that for opioid intoxication. A diag-
nosis of alcohol or sedative, hypnotic, or anxiol ytic intoxication can usually be made based
on the absence of pupillary constriction or the lack of a response to naloxone challenge. In
some cases, intoxication may be  due both to opioids and to alcohol or other sedatives. In
these cases, the naloxone challenge will no t reverse all of the sedative effects. 
Other withdrawal disorders. The anxiety and restlessness associated with opioid with-
drawal resemble symptoms seen in sedative-hypnotic withdrawal. However, opioid
withdrawal is also accompanied by rhinorrhea , lacrimation, and pupillary dilation, which
546 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
are not seen in sedative-type withdrawal. Dilated pupils ar e also seen in hallucinogen
intoxication and stimulant in toxication. However, other si gns or symptoms of opioid
withdrawal, such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cramps, rhinorrhea, or lacri-
mation, are not present. 
Comorbidity 
The most common medical conditions associated with opioid use disorder are viral (e.g.,
HIV, hepatitis C virus) and bact erial infections, particularly among users of opioids by in-
jection. These infections are less common in opioid use disorder with prescription opioids.
Opioid use disorder is often associated with other substance use disord ers, especially those
involving tobacco, alcohol, cannabis, stimulants, and benzodiazepines, which are often
taken to reduce symptoms of op ioid withdrawal or craving for opioids, or to enhance the ef-
fects of administered opioids. Individuals with opioid use disorder are at risk for the devel-
opment of mild to moderate depression that  meets symptomatic and duration criteria for
persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia) or, in some cases, for major depressive disorder.
These symptoms may represent an opioid-induc ed depressive disorder  or an exacerbation
of a preexisting primary depres sive disorder. Periods of depression are especially common
during chronic intoxication or in association with physical or psychosocial stressors that are
related to the opioid use disorder. Insomnia is common, especially during withdrawal. An-
tisocial personality disorder is much more common in individuals with opioid use disorder
than in the general population. Posttraumatic stress disorder is also seen with increased fre-
quency. A history of conduct disorder in childh ood or adolescence has been identified as a
significant risk factor for substance-related disorders, especially opioid use disorder.
Opioid Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of an opioid.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., initial eu-
phoria followed by apathy, dysphoria, psychomotor agitation or retardation, impaired
judgment) that developed during, or shortly after, opioid use.
C. Pupillary constriction (or pupillary dilation due to anoxia from severe overdose) and
one (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly after,
opioid use:
1. Drowsiness or coma.
2. Slurred speech.
3. Impairment in attention or memory.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another sub-
stance.
Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances: This specifier may be noted in the rare instance in
which hallucinations with intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions oc-
cur in the absence of a delirium.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.89.  The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
or not there is a comorbid opioid use disorder and whether or not there are perceptual dis-
turbances. 
For opioid intoxication without  perceptual disturbances: If a mild opioid use dis-
order is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F11.129,  and if a moderate or severe opioid
Opioid Withdrawal 547
use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F11.229.  If there is no comorbid opi-
oid use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F11.929.
For opioid intoxication wit h perceptual disturbances: If a mild opioid use disorder
is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F11.122,  and if a moderate or severe opioid use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F11.222.  If there is no comorbid opioid
use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F11.922.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of opioid intoxication is  the presence of clinically significant prob-
lematic behavioral or psychological changes (e .g., initial euphoria followed by apathy,
dysphoria, psychomotor agitation or retardat ion, impaired judgment) that develop dur-
ing, or shortly after, opioid use (Criteria A and B). Intoxication is accompanied by pupil-
lary constriction (unless ther e has been a severe overdose with consequent anoxia and
pupillary dilation) and one or more of the fo llowing signs: drowsiness (described as be-
ing “on the nod”), slurred speech, and impairme nt in attention or memory (Criterion C);
drowsiness may progress to co ma. Individuals with opioid intoxication may demonstrate
inattention to the environment, even to the point of ignoring potentially harmful events.
The signs or symptoms must not be attributab le to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another me ntal disorder (Criterion D).
Differential Diagnosis
Other substance intoxication. Alcohol intoxication and se dative-hypnotic intoxication
can cause a clinical picture that resembles op ioid intoxication. A diagnosis of alcohol or
sedative-hypnotic intoxication can usually be made based on the absence of pupillary con-
striction or the lack of a response to a naloxo ne challenge. In some cases, intoxication may
be due both to opioids and to alcohol or other sedatives. In these cases, the naloxone chal-
lenge will not reverse all of  the sedative effects. 
Other opioid-related disorders. Opioid intoxication is distinguished from the other
opioid-induced disorders (e.g.,  opioid-induced depressive disorder, with onset during in-
toxication) because the symptoms  in the latter disorders predominate in the clinical pre-
sentation and meet full criteria  for the relevant disorder.
Opioid Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria 292.0 (F11.23)
A. Presence of either of the following:
1. Cessation of (or reduction in) opioid use that has been heavy and prolonged (i.e.,
several weeks or longer).
2. Administration of an opioid antagonist after a period of opioid use.
B. Three (or more) of the following developing within minutes to several days after Criterion A:
1. Dysphoric mood.
2. Nausea or vomiting.
3. Muscle aches.
4. Lacrimation or rhinorrhea.
5. Pupillary dilation, piloerection, or sweating.
548 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
6. Diarrhea.
7. Yawning.
8. Fever.
9. Insomnia.
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from
another substance.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code is 292.0. The IC D-10-CM code for opioid withdrawal is
F11.23. Note that the ICD-10-CM code indicates the comorbid presence of a moderate or
severe opioid use disorder, reflecting the fact that opioid withdrawal can only occur in the
presence of a moderate or severe opioid use disorder. It is not permissible to code a co-
morbid mild opioid use disorder with opioid withdrawal.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of opioid withdrawal is  the presence of a characteristic withdrawal
syndrome that develops after the cessation of  (or reduction in) opioid use that has been
heavy and prolonged (Cri terion A1). The withdrawal synd rome can also be precipitated
by administration of an opioid  antagonist (e.g., naloxone or naltrexone) after a period of
opioid use (Criterion A2). This may also occur after administration of an opioid partial ag-
onist such as buprenorphine to a person  currently using a full opioid agonist.
Opioid withdrawal is characte rized by a pattern of signs and symptoms that are oppo-
site to the acute agonist effects. The first of these are subjective and consist of complaints of
anxiety, restlessness, and an “achy feeling” that is often located in the back and legs, along
with irritability and increased sensitivity to pain. Three or more of the following must be
present to make a diagnosis of opioid with drawal: dysphoric mood; nausea or vomiting;
muscle aches; lacrimation or rhinorrhea; pu pillary dilation, piloerection, or increased
sweating; diarrhea; yawning; fever; and insomn ia (Criterion B). Piloerection and fever are
associated with more severe withdrawal and are not often seen in routine clinical practice
because individuals with opioid use disorder  usually obtain substances before with-
drawal becomes that far advanced. These sy mptoms of opioid withdrawal must cause
clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important ar-
eas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms  must not be attributable to another med-
ical condition and are not better explained by another mental diso rder (Criterion D).
Meeting diagnostic criteria for opioid withdr awal alone is not sufficient for a diagnosis of
opioid use disorder, but concurrent symptoms of craving and drug-seeking behavior are
suggestive of comorbid opioid use disorder. ICD-10-CM codes only allow a diagnosis of
opioid withdrawal in the presence of comorb id moderate to severe opioid use disorder.
The speed and severity of withdrawal associat ed with opioids depend on the half-life of
the opioid used. Most individuals who are physiologically dependent on short-acting drugs
such as heroin begin to have withdrawal symptoms within 6–12 hours after the last dose.
Symptoms may take 2–4 days to emerge in th e case of longer-acting drugs such as metha-
done, LAAM ( L-alpha-acetylmethadol), or buprenorph ine. Acute withdrawal symptoms for
a short-acting opioid such as heroin usuall y peak within 1–3 days and gradually subside
over a period of 5–7 days. Less acute withdrawal symptoms can last for weeks to months.
These more chronic symptoms include anxiety, dysphoria,  anhedonia, and insomnia. 
Opioid Withdrawal 549
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Males with opioid withdrawal may experien ce piloerection, sweating, and spontaneous
ejaculations while awake. Opioid withdrawal is distinct from opioid use disorder and
does not necessarily occur in the presence of the drug-seeking behavior associated with
opioid use disorder. Opioid withdrawal may o ccur in any individual after cessation of re-
peated use of an opioid, whether in the se tting of medical management of pain, during
opioid agonist therapy fo r opioid use disorder, in the contex t of private recreational use, or
following attempts to self-treat sympto ms of mental disorders with opioids.
Prevalence
Among individuals from various  clinical settings, opioid withdrawal occurred in 60% of
individuals who had used heroin at least once in the prior 12 months. 
Development and Course
Opioid withdrawal is typical in the course of an opioid use disorder. It can be part of an es-
calating pattern in which an opioid is used to  reduce withdrawal symptoms, in turn lead-
ing to more withdrawal at a later time. Fo r persons with an established opioid use
disorder, withdrawal and attempts to  relieve withdrawal are typical. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other withdrawal disorders. The anxiety and restlessness associated with opioid with-
drawal resemble symptoms seen  in sedative-hypnotic withdrawal. However, opioid with-
drawal is also accompanied by rhinorrhea, la crimation, and pupillary dilation, which are
not seen in sedative-type withdrawal. 
Other substance intoxication. Dilated pupils are also seen in hallucinogen intoxication
and stimulant intoxication. However, other signs or symptoms of opioid withdrawal, such
as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal cram ps, rhinorrhea, and lacrimation, are not
present. 
Other opioid-ind uced disorders. Opioid withdrawal is distinguished from the other
opioid-induced disorders (e.g., opioid-induced depressive  disorder, with onset during
withdrawal) because the symptoms in these latt er disorders are in ex cess of those usually
associated with opioid withdrawal and meet  full criteria for th e relevant disorder.
Other Opioid-Induced Disorders
The following opioid-induced di sorders are described in other chapters of the manual with
disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-induced
mental disorders in these chapters): opioid-i nduced depressive diso rder (“Depressive Dis-
orders”); opioid-induced anxi ety disorder (“Anxiety Disord ers”); opioid-induced sleep
disorder (“Sleep-Wake Disord ers”); and opioid-induced sexual dysfunction (“Sexual Dys-
functions”). For opioid intoxica tion delirium and opioid with drawal delirium, see the crite-
ria and discussion of delirium in the chapter “Neurocognitive Disorders.” These opioid-
induced disorders are diagnosed instead of opio id intoxication or opioid withdrawal only
when the symptoms are suffici ently severe to warrant inde pendent clinical attention.
550 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Unspecified Opioid-Related Disorder
292.9 (F11.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of an opioid-
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any specific opioid-related disorder or any  of the disorders in the substance-related and
addictive disorders diagnostic class.
Sedative-, Hypnotic-, 
or Anxiolytic-Related Disorders
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorder
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal
Other Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Sedative-, Hypnotic-, or Anxiolytic-R elated Disorder
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A problematic pattern of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use leading to clinically signif-
icant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring
within a 12-month period: 
1. Sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics are often taken in larger amounts or over a lon-
ger period than was intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the sedative, hypnotic,
or anxiolytic; use the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic; or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
5. Recurrent sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use resulting in a failure to fulfill major
role obligations at work, school, or home (e.g., repeated absences from work or
poor work performance related to sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use; sedative-,
hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related absences, suspensions, or expulsions from school;
neglect of children or household).
6. Continued sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use despite having persistent or re-
current social or interpersonal problem s caused or exacerbated by the effects of
sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics (e.g., arguments with a spouse about conse-
quences of intoxication; physical fights).
7. Important social, occupational, or recreat ional activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use.
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorder 551
8. Recurrent sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use in situations in which it is physically
hazardous (e.g., driving an automobile or  operating a machine when impaired by
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use).
9. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use is continued despite knowledge of having a
persistent or recurrent physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been
caused or exacerbated by the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: 
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
to achieve intoxication or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the sed-
ative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
Note:  This criterion is not considered to be met for individuals taking sedatives,
hypnotics, or anxiolytics under medical supervision.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome for sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics
(refer to Criteria A and B of the criteria  set for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
withdrawal, pp. 557–558).
b. Sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics (or a closely related substance, such as al-
cohol) are taken to relieve or  avoid withdrawal symptoms.
Note:  This criterion is not considered to be met for individuals taking sedatives,
hypnotics, or anxiolytics under medical supervision.
Specify if:
In early remission:  After full criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
were previously met, none of the criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disor-
der have been met for at least 3 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception
that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic,” may be met).
In sustained remission:  After full criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use dis-
order were previously met, none of the criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder have been met at any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the
exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic,” may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlle d environment:  This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics is restricted.
Coding based on current severity:  Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If a sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic intoxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; or another sedative-,
hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced mental disor der is also present, do not use the codes be-
low for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. Instead the comorbid sedative, hyp-
notic, or anxiolytic use disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the sedative-, hypnotic-,
or anxiolytic-induced disorder (see the coding no te for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic in-
toxication; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; or specific sedative-, hypnotic-, or
anxiolytic-induced mental disorder). For example, if there is comorbid sedative-, hypnotic-,
or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder and sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disor-
der, only the sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolyti c-induced depressive disorder code is given
with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder is mild, moderate, or severe: F13.14 for mild sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder with sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder or F13.24 for
a moderate or severe sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder with sedative-, hypnotic-,
or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder.
552 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Specify current severity:
305.40 (F13.10) Mild:  Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
304.10 (F13.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
304.10 (F13.20) Severe:  Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” app lies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is
both in remission and in a controlled environm ent (i.e., in early remission in a controlled
environment or in sustained remission in a controlled environmen t). Examples of these
environments are closely supe rvised and substanc e-free jails, therapeutic communities,
and locked hospital units. 
Diagnostic Features
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances  include benzodiazepines, benzodiazepine-
like drugs (e.g., zolpidem, zaleplon), carb amates (e.g., glutethimide, meprobamate),
barbiturates (e.g., secobarbital), and barbitur ate-like hypnotics (e.g ., glutethimide, meth-
aqualone). This class of substances includes  all prescription slee ping medications and
almost all prescription antianxiety medica tions. Nonbenzodiazep ine antianxiety agents
(e.g., buspirone, gepirone) are not included in this class because they do not appear to be
associated with significant misuse.
Like alcohol, these agents are brain depressants and can produce similar substance/
medication-induced and substa nce use disorders. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic sub-
stances are available both by prescription an d illegally. Some individuals who obtain these
substances by prescription will develop a seda tive, hypnotic, or anxi olytic use disorder,
while others who misuse these substances or use them for intoxicati on will not develop a
use disorder. In particular, sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics with rapid onset and/or
short to intermediate lengths of action may be taken for intoxicati on purposes, although
longer acting substances in this clas s may be taken for intoxication as well.
Craving (Criterion A4), either while using or during a period of abstinence, is a typical
feature of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. Misuse of substances from this
class may occur on its own or in conjunction with use of other substances. For example, in-
dividuals may use intoxicating doses of se datives or benzodiaze pines to “come down”
from cocaine or amphetamines or use high doses of benzodiazepines in combination with
methadone to “boost” its effects. 
Repeated absences or poor work performance, school absences, suspensions or expul-
sions, and neglect of children or household (Criterion A5) may be related to sedative, hyp-
notic, or anxiolytic use disorder, as may the continued use of the substances despite
arguments with a spouse abou t consequences of intoxication or despite physical fights
(Criterion A6). Limiting contact with family or  friends, avoiding work or school, or stop-
ping participation in hobbies, sports, or games (Criterion A7) and recurrent sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic use when driving an automobile or operatin g a machine when im-
paired by sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic us e (Criterion A8) are also seen in sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
Very significant levels of tolerance and wi thdrawal can develop to the sedative, hyp-
notic, or anxiolytic. There may be evidence of tolerance and withdrawal in the absence of
a diagnosis of a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder in an individual who has
abruptly discontinued use of benzodiazepines that were taken for long periods of time at
prescribed and therapeutic doses. In these case s, an additional diagnosis of sedative, hyp-
notic, or anxiolytic use disorder is made only if other criteria are met. That is, sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications may be prescribed for appropriate medical purposes,
and depending on the dose regimen, these drugs may then produce tolerance and with-
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorder 553
drawal. If these drugs are prescribed or recommended for appropriate medical purposes,
and if they are used as prescribed, the result ing tolerance or withdrawal does not meet the
criteria for diagnosing a substance use disord er. However, it is necessary to determine
whether the drugs were appropriately prescribed and used (e.g., falsifying medical symp-
toms to obtain the medication; using more medication than prescribed; obtaining the med-
ication from several doctors without info rming them of the others’ involvement). 
Given the unidimensional nature of the symp toms of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
use disorder, severity is based on the number of criteria endorsed.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder is often associated with other substance use dis-
orders (e.g., alcohol, cannabis, opioid, stimulant use disorders). Sedatives are often used to al-
leviate the unwanted effects of these other substances. With repeated use of the substance,
tolerance develops to the sedative effects, an d a progressively higher dose is used. However,
tolerance to brain stem depressa nt effects develops much more slowly, and as the individual
takes more substance to achieve euphoria or other desired effects, there may be a sudden onset
of respiratory depression and hypotension, which may result in death. Intense or repeated
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic  intoxication may be associated  with severe de pression that,
although temporary, can lead to suicide attempt and completed suicide. 
Prevalence
The 12-month prevalences of DS M-IV sedative, hypnotic, or an xiolytic use disorder are es-
timated to be 0.3% among 12- to 17-year-ol ds and 0.2% among adults age 18 years and
older. Rates of DSM-IV sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder are slightly greater
among adult males (0.3%) than among adult fe males, but for 12- to 17-year-olds, the rate
for females (0.4%) exceeds that for males (0.2%). The 12-month prevalence of DSM-IV
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder decreases as a function of age and is great-
est among 18- to 29-year-olds (0.5%) and lo west among individuals 65 years and older
(0.04%).
Twelve-month prevalence of se dative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic  use disorder varies across
racial/ethnic subgroups of the U.S. population . For 12- to 17-year-olds, rates are greatest
among whites (0.3%) relative to African Amer icans (0.2%), Hispanics (0.2%), Native Amer-
icans (0.1%), and Asian Americans and Pacifi c Islanders (0.1%). Among adults, 12-month
prevalence is greatest amon g Native Americans and Alaska Natives (0.8%), with rates of
approximately 0.2% among African Americans, whites, and Hispanics and 0.1% among
Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders.
Development and Course
The usual course of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder involves individuals in
their teens or 20s who escalate  their occasional use of seda tive, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
agents to the point at which they develop prob lems that meet criteria  for a diagnosis. This
pattern may be especially likely among indi viduals who have other substance use disor-
ders (e.g., alcohol, opioids, stimulants). An in itial pattern of intermit tent use socially (e.g.,
at parties) can lead to daily use and high leve ls of tolerance. Once this occurs, an increasing
level of interpersonal difficulties, as well as increasingly severe episodes of cognitive dys-
function and physiological wi thdrawal, can be expected.
The second and less frequently  observed clinical course begins with an individual who
originally obtained the medication by prescrip tion from a physician, usually for the treat-
ment of anxiety, insomnia, or somatic complain ts. As either tolerance or a need for higher
doses of the medication develops, there is a gr adual increase in the dose and frequency of
self-administration. The individu al is likely to continue to justify use on the basis of his or
her original symptoms of anxiety or insomn ia, but substance-seeking behavior becomes
554 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
more prominent, and the individual may seek out multiple physicians to obtain sufficient
supplies of the medication. Tolerance can reach high levels, and withdrawal (including
seizures and withdrawal  delirium) may occur. 
As with many substance use disorders, sedati ve, hypnotic, or anxiol ytic use disorder gen-
erally has an onset during adolescence or early adult life. There is an increased risk for misuse
and problems from many psychoactive substances  as individuals age. In particular, cognitive
impairment increases as a side effect with ag e, and the metabolism of sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics decreases with age among older indi viduals. Both acute and chronic toxic effects
of these substances, especially effects on co gnition, memory, and motor coordination, are
likely to increase with age as a consequence of pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic age-
related changes. Individuals with major neuroc ognitive disorder (dementia) are more likely
to develop intoxication and impaired phy siological functioning at lower doses.
Deliberate intoxication to achieve a “high” is  most likely to be observed in teenagers
and individuals in their 20s. Problems associate d with sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics
are also seen in individuals in their 40s and older who escalate the dose of prescribed med-
ications. In older individuals, intoxicati on can resemble a progressive dementia.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Impulsivity and novelty seeking are in dividual temperaments that re-
late to the propensity to develop a substanc e use disorder but may themselves be geneti-
cally determined. 
Environmental. Since sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics are all pharmaceuticals, a key
risk factor relates to availability of the substances. In the United States, the historical pat-
terns of sedative, hypn otic, or anxiolytic misuse relate to the broad prescribing patterns.
For instance, a marked decrease in prescription  of barbiturates was associated with an in-
crease in benzodiazepine pres cribing. Peer factors may rela te to genetic predisposition in
terms of how individuals select  their environment. Other individuals at heightened risk
might include those with alcohol use disorder who may receive repeated prescriptions in
response to their complaints of al cohol-related anxiety or insomnia.
Genetic and physiological. As for other substance use diso rders, the risk for sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder can be re lated to individual, family, peer, social, and
environmental factors. Within these domains, genetic factors play a particularly important
role both directly and indirectly. Overall, ac ross development, genetic factors seem to play
a larger role in the onset of sedative, hypnotic,  or anxiolytic use disorder as individuals age
through puberty into adult life. 
Course modifiers. Early onset of use is associated with greater likelihood for develop-
ing a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
There are marked variations in prescription patt erns (and availability) of this class of sub-
stances in different countries, which may lead to variations in prevalence of sedative, hyp-
notic, or anxiolytic use disorders.
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Females may be at higher risk than males for prescription drug mi suse of sedative, hyp-
notic, or anxiolytic substances.
Diagnostic Markers
Almost all sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic substances can be identified through labora-
tory evaluations of urine or blood (the latter of which can quantify the amounts of these
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorder 555
agents in the body). Urine tests are likely to remain positive  for up to approximately 1 week
after the use of long-acting substa nces, such as diazepam or flurazepam.
Functional Consequences of 
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use Disorder
The social and interpersonal co nsequences of sedative, hypnot ic, or anxiolytic use disorder
mimic those of alcohol in terms of the potentia l for disinhibited behavior. Accidents, interper-
sonal difficulties (such as argume nts or fights), and interference  with work or school perfor-
mance are all common outcomes. Physical examinat ion is likely to reveal evidence of a mild
decrease in most aspects of autonomic nervous system functioning, including a slower pulse,
a slightly decreased respiratory rate, and a slight  drop in blood pressure (most likely to occur
with postural changes). At high doses, sedative, hypnotic, or an xiolytic substances can be le-
thal, particularly when mixed with alcohol, al though the lethal dosage varies considerably
among the specific substances. Overdoses may be associated with a deterioration in vital signs
that signals an impending medical emergency (e .g., respiratory arrest  from barbiturates).
There may be consequences of trauma (e.g., internal bleeding or a subdural hematoma) from
accidents that occur while intoxicated. Intraven ous use of these substances can result in med-
ical complications related to the use of contaminated needles (e.g., hepatitis and HIV). 
Acute intoxication can result in accidental injuries and automobile accidents. For elderly
individuals, even short-term use of these sedati ng medications at prescr ibed doses can be as-
sociated with an increased risk for cognitive problems and falls. The disinhibiting effects of
these agents, like alcohol, may potentially cont ribute to overly aggressive behavior, with sub-
sequent interpersonal and legal problems. Accide ntal or deliberate overdoses, similar to those
observed for alcohol use disorder or repeated alcohol intoxication, can occur. In contrast to
their wide margin of safety when used alone,  benzodiazepines taken in combination with al-
cohol can be particularly dangerous, and accidental overdoses are reported commonly. Acci-
dental overdoses have also been  reported in individuals who deliberately misuse barbiturates
and other nonbenzodiazepine sedatives (e.g., me thaqualone), but since these agents are much
less available than the benzodiazepines, the freq uency of overdosing is  low in most settings.
Differential Diagnosis
Other mental disorders or medical conditions. Individuals with se dative-, hypnotic-,
or anxiolytic-induced disorders may present with symptoms (e.g., anxiety) that resemble
primary mental disorders (e.g., generalized an xiety disorder vs. sedative-, hypnotic-, or
anxiolytic-induced anxiety disorder, with on set during withdrawal). The slurred speech,
incoordination, and other associa ted features characteristic of sedative, hypnotic, or anx-
iolytic intoxication could be the result of an other medical condition (e .g., multiple sclero-
sis) or of a prior head trauma (e.g., a subdural hematoma).
Alcohol use disorder. Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder must be differenti-
ated from alcohol use disorder.
Clinically appropriate use of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications. Individuals
may continue to take benzodiazepine medication according to  a physician’s direction for a
legitimate medical indication over extended pe riods of time. Even if  physiological signs of
tolerance or withdrawal are manifested, many  of these individuals do not develop symp-
toms that meet the criteria for sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder because they
are not preoccupied with obtaining the substanc e and its use does not interfere with their
performance of usual social or occupational roles.
Comorbidity
Nonmedical use of sedative, hypnotic, or anxi olytic agents is associated with alcohol use
disorder, tobacco use disorder, and, generally, illicit drug use.  There may also be an over-
556 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
lap between sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder an d antisocial personality dis-
order; depressive, bipolar, and anxiety disorders; and other substance use disorders, such
as alcohol use disorder and illicit drug use disorders. Antisocial behavior and antisocial
personality disorder are especially associated with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder when the substances are obtained illegally.
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic.
B. Clinically significant maladaptive behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., inappro-
priate sexual or aggressive behavior, m ood lability, impaired judgment) that developed
during, or shortly after, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use. 
C. One (or more) of the following signs or symptoms developing during, or shortly after,
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use: 
1. Slurred speech.
2. Incoordination.
3. Unsteady gait.
4. Nystagmus.
5. Impairment in cognition (e.g., attention, memory).
6. Stupor or coma.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another sub-
stance.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.89.  The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
there is a comorbid sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder. If a mild sedative, hyp-
notic, or anxiolytic use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F13.129,  and if a mod-
erate or severe sedative, hypnotic, or anxio lytic use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM
code is F13.229.  If there is no comorbid sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder, then
the ICD-10-CM code is F13.929.
Note:  For information on Developm ent and Course; Risk and Prognostic Factors; Culture-
Related Diagnostic Issues; Diagnostic Marker s; Functional Consequences of Sedative,
Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Intoxication; and Co morbidity, see the corre sponding sections in
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication is the presence of clini-
cally significant maladaptive behavioral or ps ychological changes (e.g ., inappropriate sexual
or aggressive behavior, mood lability, impair ed judgment, impaired social or occupational
functioning) that develo p during, or shortly after, use of a sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
(Criteria A and B). As with other brain depressants, such as alcohol, these behaviors may be ac-
companied by slurred speech, incoordination (at le vels that can interfere with driving abilities
and with performing usual activities to the poin t of causing falls or automobile accidents), an
unsteady gait, nystagmus, impairment in cogn ition (e.g., attentional or memory problems),
and stupor or coma (Criterion C). Memory impa irment is a prominent feature of sedative, hyp-
notic, or anxiolytic intoxication and is most often characterized by an  anterograde amnesia that
resembles “alcoholic blackouts,” which can be  disturbing to the individual. The symptoms
must not be attributable to another medical co ndition and are not better explained by another
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal 557
mental disorder (Criterion D). Intoxication ma y occur in individuals who are receiving these
substances by prescription, are borrowing the medi cation from friends or relatives, or are de-
liberately taking the substance to achieve intoxication.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Associated features include taking more medi cation than prescribed, taking multiple dif-
ferent medications, or mixing sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic agents with alcohol, which
can markedly increase the effects of these agents. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxi olytic intoxication in the general population
is unclear. However, it is probable that most  nonmedical users of sedatives, hypnotics, or
anxiolytics would at some time have signs or  symptoms that meet criteria for sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication; if so, then the prevalence of nonmedical sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic use in the general po pulation may be simila r to the prevalence of
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxicati on. For example, tranquilizers are used non-
medically by 2.2% of Amer icans older than 12 years. 
Differential Diagnosis
Alcohol use disorders. Since the clinical presentations may be identical, distinguishing sed-
ative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication from  alcohol use disorders requires evidence for re-
cent ingestion of sedative, hypnot ic, or anxiolytic medications by  self-report, informant report,
or toxicological testing. Many individuals who misuse sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics may
also misuse alcohol and other su bstances, and so multiple intoxi cation diagnoses are possible. 
Alcohol intoxication. Alcohol intoxication may be distin guished from sedative, hypnotic,
or anxiolytic intoxication by the smell of al cohol on the breath. Otherwise, the features of
the two disorders may be similar.
Other sedative-, hypnotic-, or  anxiolytic-induced disorders. Sedative, hypnotic, or anx-
iolytic intoxication is distin guished from the other sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-
induced disorders (e.g., sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced anxiety disorder, with
onset during withdrawal) because the sympto ms in the latter disorders predominate in
the clinical presentation and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
Neurocognitive disorders. In situations of cognitive im pairment, traumatic brain in-
jury, and delirium from other causes, sedative s, hypnotics, or anxiolytics may be intoxi-
cating at quite low dosages. The differential diagnosis in these complex settings is based
on the predominant syndrome. An additional diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, or anxio-
lytic intoxication may be appropriate even if the substance has been ingested at a low dos-
age in the setting of these other (o r similar) co-occu rring conditions. 
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Cessation of (or reduction in) sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use that has been pro-
longed. 
B. Two (or more) of the following, developing within several hours to a few days after the ces-
sation of (or reduction in) sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use described in Criterion A: 
1. Autonomic hyperactivity (e.g., sweating or pulse rate greater than 100 bpm).
2. Hand tremor.
558 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
3. Insomnia.
4. Nausea or vomiting.
5. Transient visual, tactile, or auditory hallucinations or illusions.
6. Psychomotor agitation.
7. Anxiety.
8. Grand mal seizures.
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. 
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from
another substance.
Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances:  This specifier may be noted when hallucinations with in-
tact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of a delirium.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.0.  The ICD-10-CM code for sedative, hypnotic,
or anxiolytic withdrawal depends on whether or not there is a comorbid moderate or se-
vere sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use di sorder and whether or not there are perceptual
disturbances. For sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal without perceptual distur-
bances, the ICD-10-CM code is F13.239.  For sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal
with perceptual disturbances, the ICD-10-CM code is F13.232.  Note that the ICD-10-CM
codes indicate the comorbid presence of a moderate or severe sedative, hypnotic, or anx-
iolytic use disorder, reflecting the fact that sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal can
only occur in the presence of a moderate or severe sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder. It is not permissible to code a comorbid mild sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use
disorder with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal.
Note:  For information on Developm ent and Course; Risk and Prognostic Factors; Culture-
Related Diagnostic Issues; Functional Conseq uences of Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic
Withdrawal; and Comorbidity, see the corresp onding sections in sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic use disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal is the presence of a char-
acteristic syndrome that develops  after a marked decrease in or cessation of intake after several
weeks or more of regular use (C riteria A and B). This withdrawal  syndrome is characterized by
two or more symptoms (similar to alcohol with drawal) that include au tonomic hyperactivity
(e.g., increases in heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure, or body temperature, along with
sweating); a tremor of the hands; insomnia ; nausea, sometimes accompanied by vomiting;
anxiety; and psychomotor agitation. A grand mal seizure may occur in perhaps as many as
20%–30% of individuals undergoing untreated withdrawal from these substances. In severe
withdrawal, visual, tactile, or auditory hallucinations or illus ions can occur but are usually in
the context of a delirium. If the individual’s rea lity testing is intact (i.e., he or she knows the
substance is causing the hallucinations) and the illusions occur in a clear sensorium, the spec-
ifier “with perceptual disturbances” can be note d. When hallucinations occur in the absence of
intact reality testing, a diagnosis of substanc e/medication-induced ps ychotic disorder should
be considered. The symptoms cause clinically si gnificant distress or impairment in social, oc-
cupational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be
attributable to anothe r medical condition and are not bette r explained by an other mental dis-
order (e.g., alcohol withdrawal or generalized anxiety disorder) (Criterion D). Relief of with-
drawal symptoms with admini stration of any sedative-hypnotic agent would support a
diagnosis of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal.
Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Withdrawal 559
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The timing and severity of the withdrawal sy ndrome will differ depending on the specific
substance and its pharmacokinetics and ph armacodynamics. For example, withdrawal
from shorter-acting substances that are rapidl y absorbed and that have no active metabo-
lites (e.g., triazolam) can begi n within hours after the subs tance is stopped; withdrawal
from substances with long-acting metabolites  (e.g., diazepam) may not begin for 1–2 days
or longer. The withdrawal syndrome produced by substances in this class may be charac-
terized by the development of a delirium that  can be life-threatening. There may be evi-
dence of tolerance and withdr awal in the absence of a diagnosis of a substance use
disorder in an individual who has abruptly discontinued benzodiazepines that were taken
for long periods of time at prescribed and therapeutic doses. Howe ver, ICD-10-CM codes
only allow a diagnosis of seda tive, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal in the presence of
comorbid moderate to severe sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
The time course of the withdr awal syndrome is generally predicted by the half-life of
the substance. Medications whose actions typica lly last about 10 hours or less (e.g., loraz-
epam, oxazepam, temazepam) produce withdr awal symptoms within 6–8 hours of de-
creasing blood levels that peak in intensity on the second day and improve markedly by
the fourth or fifth day. For substances with  longer half-lives (e .g., diazepam), symptoms
may not develop for more than 1 week, peak in  intensity during the second week, and de-
crease markedly during the third or fourth week. There may be additional longer-term
symptoms at a much lower level of inte nsity that persist for several months.
The longer the substance has been taken and the higher the dosages used, the more likely
it is that there will be severe withdrawal. However, withdrawal has been reported with as little
as 15 mg of diazepam (or its eq uivalent in other benzodiazepines) when taken daily for several
months. Doses of approximately 40 mg of diazepa m (or its equivalent) daily are more likely to
produce clinically relevant withdrawal symptoms, and even higher doses (e.g., 100 mg of di-
azepam) are more likely to be followed by withdrawal seizures or delirium. Sedative, hyp-
notic, or anxiolytic withdrawal delirium is ch aracterized by disturbances in consciousness and
cognition, with visual, tactile, or auditory ha llucinations. When present, sedative, hypnotic, or
anxiolytic withdrawal delirium should be diagnosed instead of withdrawal.
Prevalence 
The prevalence of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal is unclear. 
Diagnostic Markers
Seizures and autonomic instability in the setting of a history of prolonged exposure to sed-
ative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic medications su ggest a high likelihood of sedative, hypnotic,
or anxiolytic withdrawal. 
Differential Diagnosis
Other medical disorders. The symptoms of sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic with-
drawal may be mimicked by other medical cond itions (e.g., hypoglyc emia, diabetic keto-
acidosis). If seizures are a feature of the seda tive, hypnotic, or anxi olytic withdrawal, the
differential diagnosis includes the various causes  of seizures (e.g., infections, head injury,
poisonings). 
Essential tremor. Essential tremor, a disorder that frequently runs in families, may
erroneously suggest the tremulousness associat ed with sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
withdrawal. 
Alcohol withdrawal. Alcohol withdrawal produces a sy ndrome very similar to that of
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal. 
560 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Other sedative-, hypnotic-, or  anxiolytic-induced disorders. Sedative, hypnotic, or anx-
iolytic withdrawal is distingu ished from the other sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-
induced disorders (e.g., sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced anxiety disorder, with
onset during withdrawal) beca use the symptoms in the latter disorders predominate in
the clinical presentation and are severe enough to warrant clinical attention.
Anxiety disorders. Recurrence or worsening of an underlying anxiety disorder pro-
duces a syndrome similar to sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal. Withdrawal
would be suspected with an abrupt reduction in the dosage of a sedative, hypnotic, or anx-
iolytic medication. When a taper is under wa y, distinguishing the withdrawal syndrome
from the underlying anxiety disorder can be difficult. As with alco hol, lingering with-
drawal symptoms (e.g., anxiety, moodiness, and trouble sleeping) can be mistaken for
non-substance/medication-induc ed anxiety or depr essive disorders (e.g., generalized
anxiety disorder).
Other Sedative-, Hypnotic-, 
or Anxiolytic-Induced Disorders
The following sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolyt ic-induced disorders are described in other
chapters of the manual with disorders with  which they share phenomenology (see the sub-
stance/medication-induced mental disorders in  these chapters): sedative-, hypnotic-, or
anxiolytic-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic
Disorders”); sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic -induced bipolar disord er (“Bipolar and Re-
lated Disorders”); sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced depressive disorder (“De-
pressive Disorders”); sedative-, hypnotic-,  or anxiolytic-induced anxiety disorder
(“Anxiety Disorders”); sedative-, hypnotic-, or  anxiolytic-induced sleep disorder (“Sleep-
Wake Disorders”); sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induc ed sexual dysfunction (“Sex-
ual Dysfunctions”); and sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced major or mild neuro-
cognitive disorder (“Neurocog nitive Disorders”). For seda tive, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
intoxication delirium and sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal delirium, see the
criteria and discussion of delirium in the chapter “Neurocognitive Disorders.” These sed-
ative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-induced disorders are diagnosed inst ead of sedative, hyp-
notic, or anxiolytic intoxication or sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal only when
the symptoms are sufficiently severe to  warrant independent clinical attention.
Unspecified Sedative-, Hypnotic-,
or Anxiolytic-Related Disorder
292.9 (F13.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a sedative-,
hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impair-
ment in social, occupational, or other impor tant areas of functioning predominate but do
not meet the full criteria for any specific s edative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related disorder
or any of the disorders in the substance-related and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
Stimulant Use Disorder 561
Stimulant-Related Disorders
Stimulant Use Disorder
Stimulant Intoxication
Stimulant Withdrawal
Other Stimulant-Induced Disorders
Unspecified Stimulant-Related Disorder
Stimulant Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. A pattern of amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant use leading to
clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the follow-
ing, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. The stimulant is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was in-
tended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control stimulant use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the stimulant, use the
stimulant, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the stimulant.
5. Recurrent stimulant use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work,
school, or home.
6. Continued stimulant use despite having persi stent or recurrent social or interper-
sonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of the stimulant.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreat ional activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of stimulant use.
8. Recurrent stimulant use in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
9. Stimulant use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
physical or psychological problem that is  likely to have been caused or exacerbated
by the stimulant.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the stimulant to achieve intoxication
or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the
stimulant.
Note:  This criterion is not considered to be met for those taking stimulant medica-
tions solely under appropriate medical supervision, such as medications for atten-
tion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or narcolepsy. 
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: 
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome fo r the stimulant (refer to Criteria A and
B of the criteria set for stimulant withdrawal, p. 569).
b. The stimulant (or a closely related substance) is taken to relieve or avoid with-
drawal symptoms.
562 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Note:  This criterion is not considered to be met for those taking stimulant medica-
tions solely under appropriate medical supervision, such as medications for atten-
tion-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or narcolepsy.
Specify if:
In early remission:  After full criteria for stimulant use disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria for stimulant use disorder have been met for at least 3 months but
for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong de-
sire or urge to use the stimulant,” may be met).
In sustained remission:  After full criteria for stimulant use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for stimulant use disorder have been met at any time during a
period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a
strong desire or urge to use the stimulant,” may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment:  This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to stimulants is restricted. 
Coding based on current severity:  Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If an amphetamine in-
toxication, amphetamine withdrawal, or anot her amphetamine-induced mental disorder is
also present, do not use the codes below for amphetamine use disorder. Instead, the co-
morbid amphetamine use disorder is indicat ed in the 4th character of the amphetamine-
induced disorder code (see the coding note for amphetamine intoxication, amphetamine
withdrawal, or a specific amphetamine-induced m ental disorder). For example, if there is
comorbid amphetamine-type or other stimulant-induced depressive disorder and amphet-
amine-type or other stimulant use disorder, only the amphetamine-type or other stimulant-
induced depressive disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the
comorbid amphetamine-type or other stimulant use disorder is mild, moderate, or severe:
F15.14 for mild amphetamine-type or other st imulant use disorder with amphetamine-type
or other stimulant-induced depressive disorder or F15.24 for a moderate or severe am-
phetamine-type or other stimulant use disorder  with amphetamine-type or other stimulant-
induced depressive disorder. Similarly, if there is comorbid cocaine-induced depressive
disorder and cocaine use disorder, only the cocaine-induced depressive disorder code is
given, with the 4th character indicating whether the comorbid cocaine use disorder is mild,
moderate, or severe: F14.14 for mild cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced depressive
disorder or F14.24 for a moderate or severe cocaine use disorder with cocaine-induced
depressive disorder. 
Specify current severity:
Mild:  Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
305.70 (F15.10)  Amphetamine-type substance
305.60 (F14.10)  Cocaine
305.70 (F15.10)  Other or unspecified stimulant
Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
304.40 (F15.20)  Amphetamine-type substance
304.20 (F14.20)  Cocaine
304.40 (F15.20)  Other or unspecified stimulant
Severe:  Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
304.40 (F15.20)  Amphetamine-type substance
304.20 (F14.20)  Cocaine
304.40 (F15.20)  Other or unspecified stimulant
Stimulant Use Disorder 563
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” app lies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is
both in remission and in a controlled environm ent (i.e., in early remission in a controlled
environment or in sustained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these
environments are closely supe rvised and substanc e-free jails, therapeutic communities,
and locked hospital units. 
Diagnostic Features
The amphetamine and amphetamine-type stimul ants include substances with a substi-
tuted-phenylethylamine struct ure, such as amphetamine, dextroamphetamine, and meth-
amphetamine. Also included are those substanc es that are structura lly different but have
similar effects, such as methylphenidate. These substances are usually taken orally or in-
travenously, although methamphetamine is also  taken by the nasal route. In addition to
the synthetic amphetamine-type compounds, th ere are naturally occurring, plant-derived
stimulants such as khât.  Amphetamines and other stimulants  may be obtained by prescrip-
tion for the treatment of obesity, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and narcolepsy.
Consequently, prescribed stimul ants may be diverted into the illegal market. The effects of
amphetamines and amphetamine-like drugs are sim ilar to those of cocaine, such that the
criteria for stimulant use disord er are presented here as a sing le disorder with the ability to
specify the particular stimulant used by the individual. Cocaine may be consumed in sev-
eral preparations (e.g., coca leaves, coca pa ste, cocaine hydrochloride, and cocaine alka-
loids such as freebase and crack) that differ in  potency because of varying levels of purity
and speed of onset. However, in all forms of the substance, cocaine is the active ingredient.
Cocaine hydrochloride powder is usually “snorted” through the nostrils or dissolved in
water and injected intravenously.
Individuals exposed to amphetamine-type stimulants or cocaine can develop stimu-
lant use disorder as rapidly as  1 week, although the onset is  not always th is rapid. Re-
gardless of the route of administration, tole rance occurs with repeated use. Withdrawal
symptoms, particularly hypersomnia, increa sed appetite, and dysphoria, can occur and
can enhance craving. Most individuals with stimulant use disorder have experienced tol-
erance or withdrawal. 
Use patterns and course are similar for di sorders involving amphetamine-type stimu-
lants and cocaine, as both substances are po tent central nervous system stimulants with
similar psychoactive and sympathomimetic effects. Amphetamine-type stimulants are
longer acting than cocaine and thus are used fewer times per day. Usage may be chronic or
episodic, with binges punctuated by brief no n-use periods. Aggressive or violent behavior
is common when high doses are smoked, ingested, or administered intravenously. Intense
temporary anxiety resembling panic disorder or generalized anxiety disorder, as well as
paranoid ideation and psychotic episodes that resemble schizophrenia, is seen with high-
dose use.
Withdrawal states are associated with temporary but intense depressive symptoms that
can resemble a major depressive episode; the depressive symptoms usually resolve within
1 week. Tolerance to amphetamine -type stimulants develops and leads to escalation of the
dose. Conversely, some users of amphetami ne-type stimulants develop sensitization,
characterized by enhanced effects.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
When injected or smoked, stimulants typica lly produce an instant feeling of well-being,
confidence, and euphoria. Dramatic behavior al changes can rapidly develop with stimu-
lant use disorder. Chaotic behavior, social is olation, aggressive behavior, and sexual dys-
function can result from long -term stimulant use disorder. 
564 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Individuals with acute intoxication may pr esent with rambling speech, headache, tran-
sient ideas of reference, and tinnitus. There may be paranoid ideati on, auditory halluci-
nations in a clear sensorium, and tactile hallucinations, which the individual usually
recognizes as drug effects. Thre ats or acting out of aggressive  behavior may occur. Depres-
sion, suicidal ideation, irritability, anhedonia,  emotional lability, or disturbances in atten-
tion and concentration commonly occur during withdrawal. Mental disturbances associated
with cocaine use usually resolve hours to days  after cessation of use but can persist for
1 month. Physiological changes during stimulant withdrawal ar e opposite to those of the
intoxication phase, sometimes including bradycardia. Temporary depressive symptoms
may meet symptomatic and duration criteria for major depressive episode. Histories con-
sistent with repeated panic attacks, social an xiety disorder (social phobia)–like behavior,
and generalized anxiety–like syndromes are co mmon, as are eating disorders. One ex-
treme instance of stimulant toxicity is st imulant-induced psychotic disorder, a disorder
that resembles schizophrenia, with delusions and hallucinations. 
Individuals with stimulant use disorder of ten develop conditioned responses to drug-
related stimuli (e.g., craving on seeing an y white powderlike substance). These responses
contribute to relapse, are difficult to extinguish, and persist after detoxification.
Depressive symptoms with su icidal ideation or behavior  can occur and are generally
the most serious problems seen during stimulant withdrawal.
Prevalence 
Stimulant use disorder: amphetamine-type stimulants. Estimated 12-month prevalence
of amphetamine-type stimulant use disorder in the United States is 0.2% among 12- to 17-
year-olds and 0.2% among individuals 18 year s and older. Rates are similar among adult
males and females (0.2%), but among 12- to 17- year-olds, the rate for females (0.3%) is
greater than that for males (0.1%). Intravenou s stimulant use has a male-to-female ratio of
3:1 or 4:1, but rates are more balanced amon g non-injecting users, with males representing
54% of primary treatment admissions. Twelve -month prevalence is greater among 18- to
29-year-olds (0.4%) compared with 45- to 64-ye ar-olds (0.1%). For 12- to 17-year-olds, rates
are highest among whites and African Americans (0.3%) compared with Hispanics (0.1%)
and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.01%), with amphetamine-type stimulant use
disorder virtually absent among Native Americans. Among adults, rates are highest among
Native Americans and Alaska Natives (0.6%) compared with whites (0.2%) and Hispanics
(0.2%), with amphetamine-type stimulant use disorder virtually absent among African
Americans and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders. Past-year nonprescribed use of
prescription stimulants occu rred among 5%–9% of children  through high school, with
5%–35% of college-age persons reporting past-year use.
Stimulant use disorder: cocaine. Estimated 12-month prevalence of cocaine use disorder
in the United States is 0.2% among 12- to 17- year-olds and 0.3% amon g individuals 18 years
and older. Rates are higher among males (0 .4%) than among females (0.1%). Rates are
highest among 18- to 29-year-olds (0.6%) and lo west among 45- to 64-year-olds (0.1%). Among
adults, rates are greater among Native Amer icans (0.8%) compared with African Ameri-
cans (0.4%), Hispanics (0.3%), whites (0.2%) , and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders
(0.1%). In contrast, for 12- to 17-year-olds, rates are similar among Hispanics (0.2%), whites
(0.2%), and Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders (0.2%); and lower among African Amer-
icans (0.02%); with cocaine use disorder vi rtually absent among Native Americans and
Alaska Natives.
Development and Course
Stimulant use disorders occur throughout all levels of society and are more common among
individuals ages 12–25 years compared with indi viduals 26 years and olde r. First regular use
Stimulant Use Disorder 565
among individuals in treatment occurs, on average, at approximately age 23 years. For pri-
mary methamphetamine–primary treatment admissions, the average age is 31 years.
Some individuals begin stimulant use to control weight or to improve performance in
school, work, or athlet ics. This includes obtaining medications such as methylphenidate or
amphetamine salts prescribed to others for the treatment of attention-deficit/hyperac-
tivity disorder. Stimulant use disorder can develop rapidly with intravenous or smoked
administration; among primary admissions fo r amphetamine-type stimulant use, 66% re-
ported smoking, 18% reported inje cting, and 10% reported snorting. 
Patterns of stimulant administration include episodic or daily (or almost daily) use.
Episodic use tends to be separated by 2 or more days of non-use (e.g., intense use over a
weekend or on one or more weekdays). “Bin ges” involve continuous high-dose use over
hours or days and are often associated with  physical dependence. Binges usually termi-
nate only when stimulant supplies are deplet ed or exhaustion ensues. Chronic daily use
may involve high or low doses, often with an increase in dose over time.
Stimulant smoking and intravenous use are a ssociated with rapid progression to se-
vere-level stimulant use disorder, often occu rring over weeks to months. Intranasal use of
cocaine and oral use of amphetamine-type stim ulants result in more  gradual progression
occurring over months to years. With continui ng use, there is a diminution of pleasurable
effects due to tolerance and an increase in dysphoric effects. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Comorbid bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, antisocial personality disor-
der, and other substance use disorders are risk  factors for developing stimulant use disorder
and for relapse to cocaine use in treatment samp les. Also, impulsivity and similar personality
traits may affect treatment outcomes. Childhood  conduct disorder and adult antisocial per-
sonality disorder are associated with the la ter development of stim ulant-related disorders.
Environmental. Predictors of cocaine use among teenagers include prenatal cocaine ex-
posure, postnatal cocaine use by parents, and exposure to  community violence during
childhood. For youths, especially females, risk  factors include living in an unstable home
environment, having a psychiatric conditio n, and associating with dealers and users.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Stimulant use–attendant disorders affect all ra cial/ethnic, socioeconomic, age, and gender
groups. Diagnostic issues may be  related to societal consequenc es (e.g., arrest, school sus-
pensions, employment suspension). Despite sm all variations, cocaine and other stimulant
use disorder diagnostic criteria perform eq ually across gender and race/ethnicity groups.
Chronic use of cocaine impairs cardiac left ventricular function in African Americans.
Approximately 66% of individuals admitt ed for primary methamphetamine/amphet-
amine-related disorders are non-Hispanic whit e, followed by 21% of Hispanic origin, 3%
Asian and Pacific Islander, and 3% non-Hispanic black.
Diagnostic Markers
Benzoylecgonine, a metabolite of cocaine, typi cally remains in the urine for 1–3 days after
a single dose and may be present for 7–12 days in individuals using repeated high doses.
Mildly elevated liver function tests can be pr esent in cocaine injectors or users with con-
comitant alcohol use. There are no neurobiological markers of diagnostic utility. Discon-
tinuation of chronic cocaine use may be asso ciated with electroencephalographic changes,
suggesting persistent abnormalit ies; alterations in secretion patterns of prolactin; and
downregulation of dopamine receptors.
Short-half-life amphetamine-type stim ulants (MDMA [3,4-methylenedioxy- N-methyl-
amphetamine], methamphetamine) can be detected  for 1–3 days, and possibly up to 4 days
566 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
depending on dosage and metabolism. Hair sampl es can be used to detect presence of am-
phetamine-type stimulants for up to 90 days. Other laboratory findings, as well as physical
findings and other medical conditions (e.g., weight loss, malnutrition; poor hygiene), are
similar for both cocaine and amphet amine-type stimulant use disorder.
Functional Consequences of  Stimulant Use Disorder 
Various medical conditions may occur dependin g on the route of administration. Intrana-
sal users often develop sinusitis, irritation, bl eeding of the nasal mucosa, and a perforated
nasal septum. Individuals who smoke the drugs are at increased risk for respiratory prob-
lems (e.g., coughing, bronchitis, and pneumonitis). Injectors have puncture marks and
“tracks,” most commonly on their forearms. Ri sk of HIV infection increases with frequent
intravenous injections and unsafe sexual acti vity. Other sexually transmitted diseases,
hepatitis, and tuberculosis and other lung infections are also seen . Weight loss and mal-
nutrition are common. 
Chest pain may be a common symptom during stimulant intoxication. Myocardial in-
farction, palpitations and arrhythmias, sudden  death from respiratory or cardiac arrest,
and stroke have been associated with stimulant use among young and otherwise healthy
individuals. Seizures can occur with stimulant use. Pneumothorax can result from per-
forming Valsalva-like maneuvers done to better absorb inhaled smoke. Traumatic injuries
due to violent behavior are common among in dividuals trafficking drugs. Cocaine use is
associated with irregularities in placental bl ood flow, abruptio placentae, premature labor
and delivery, and an increased prevalence of infants with very low birth weights.
Individuals with stimulant use disorder may become involved in theft, prostitution, or
drug dealing in order to acquire drugs or money for drugs. 
Neurocognitive impairment is common am ong methamphetamine users. Oral health
problems include “meth mouth” with gum dise ase, tooth decay, and mouth sores related
to the toxic effects of smoking the drug and to bruxism while intoxicated. Adverse pulmo-
nary effects appear to be le ss common for amphetamine-type  stimulants because they are
smoked fewer times per day. Emergency department visits are common for stimulant-re-
lated mental disorder symptoms, injury, skin infections, and dental pathology. 
Differential Diagnosis
Primary mental disorders. Stimulant-induced disorders may resemble primary mental
disorders (e.g., major depressive disorder) (for discussion of th is differential diagnosis, see
“Stimulant Withdrawal”). The mental disturbanc es resulting from the effects of stimulants
should be distinguished from  the symptoms of schizophrenia; depressive and bipolar dis-
orders; generalized anxiety disorder; and panic disorder.
Phencyclidine intoxication. Intoxication with phencyclidine (“PCP” or “angel dust”) or
synthetic “designer drugs” such as mephedrone (known by different names, including
“bath salts”) may cause a similar clinical pict ure and can only be di stinguished from stim-
ulant intoxication by the presence of coca ine or amphetamine-type substance metabolites
in a urine or plasma sample. 
Stimulant intoxication and withdrawal. Stimulant intoxication and withdrawal are dis-
tinguished from the other stimulant-induced di sorders (e.g., anxiety disorder, with onset
during intoxication) because the symptoms in the latter disorders predominate the clinical
presentation and are severe enough to warrant independent clinical attention.
Comorbidity
Stimulant-related disorders often co-occur wi th other substance use disorders, especially
those involving substances with  sedative properties, which are often taken to reduce in-
Stimulant Intoxication 567
somnia, nervousness, and other unpleasant side effects. Cocaine users often use alcohol,
while amphetamine-type stimulant users ofte n use cannabis. Stimulant use disorder may
be associated with posttraumatic stress diso rder, antisocial personality disorder, atten-
tion-deficit/hyperacti vity disorder, and gambling di sorder. Cardiopulmonary problems
are often present in individuals seeking treatm ent for cocaine-related problems, with chest
pain being the most common. Medical problems occur in response to adulterants used as
“cutting” agents. Cocaine users who ingest co caine cut with levamisole, an antimicrobial
and veterinary medication, may experience agranulocytosis and febrile neutropenia. 
Stimulant Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Recent use of an amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes (e.g., euphoria
or affective blunting; changes in sociability; hypervigilance; interpersonal sensitivity;
anxiety, tension, or anger; stereotyped behaviors; impaired judgment) that developed
during, or shortly after, use of a stimulant. 
C. Two (or more) of the following signs or symptoms, developing during, or shortly after,
stimulant use: 
1. Tachycardia or bradycardia.
2. Pupillary dilation.
3. Elevated or lowered blood pressure.
4. Perspiration or chills.
5. Nausea or vomiting.
6. Evidence of weight loss.
7. Psychomotor agitation or retardation.
8. Muscular weakness, respiratory depression , chest pain, or cardiac arrhythmias.
9. Confusion, seizures, dyskinesias, dystonias, or coma.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication with another sub-
stance.
Specify the specific intoxicant (i.e., amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or other
stimulant).
Specify if:
With perceptual disturbances:  This specifier may be noted when hallucinations with
intact reality testing or auditory, visual, or tactile illusions occur in the absence of a de-
lirium.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.89.  The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
the stimulant is an amphetamine, cocaine, or other stimulant; whether there is a comorbid
amphetamine, cocaine, or other stimulant use disorder; and whether or not there are per-
ceptual disturbances.
For amphetamine, cocaine, or other stimulant intoxication, without perceptual dis-
turbances:  If a mild amphetamine or other stimulant use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-
10-CM code is F15.129, and if a moderate or severe amphetamine or other stimulant use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.229.  If there is no comorbid amphet-
amine or other stimulant use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F15.929. Similarly, if
a mild cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F14.129,  and if a mod-
erate or severe cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F14.229. If
there is no comorbid cocaine use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F14.929.  
568 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
For amphetamine, cocaine, or other stimulant intoxication, with perceptual distur-
bances:  If a mild amphetamine or other stimulant use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-
CM code is F15.122, and if a moderate or severe amphetamine or other stimulant use
disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F15.222.  If there is no comorbid amphet-
amine or other stimulant use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F15.922. Similarly, if
a mild cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F14.122,  and if a mod-
erate or severe cocaine use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F14.222. If
there is no comorbid cocaine use disorder, then the ICD-10-CM code is F14.922.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of stimulant intoxicati on, related to amphetamine-type stimulants
and cocaine, is the presence of clinically significant behavioral or psychological changes
that develop during, or shortly after, use of stimulants (Criteria A and B). Auditory hallu-
cinations may be prominent, as may paranoid  ideation, and these symptoms must be dis-
tinguished from an independent psychotic disorder such as schizophrenia. Stimulant
intoxication usually begins with a “high” f eeling and includes one or more of the follow-
ing: euphoria with enhanced vigor, gregarious ness, hyperactivity, restlessness, hypervig-
ilance, interpersonal sensitivity, talkativenes s, anxiety, tension, alertness, grandiosity,
stereotyped and repetitive behavior, anger, impaired judgment, and, in the case of chronic
intoxication, affective blunting with fatigue or sadness and social withdrawal. These be-
havioral and psychological changes are acco mpanied by two or more of the following
signs and symptoms that develop during or sh ortly after stimulant us e: tachycardia or bra-
dycardia; pupillary dilation; el evated or lowered blood pressu re; perspiration or chills;
nausea or vomiting; evidence of weight loss ; psychomotor agitation or retardation; mus-
cular weakness, respiratory depression, chest pain, or card iac arrhythmias; and confu-
sion, seizures, dyskinesias, dystonias, or coma  (Criterion C). Intoxi cation, either acute or
chronic, is often associated with impaired so cial or occupational functioning. Severe in-
toxication can lead to convulsions, cardiac arrhythmias, hyperpyrexia, and death. For the
diagnosis of stimulant intoxica tion to be made, the symptoms must not be attributable
to another medical condition and not better explained by anot her mental disorder (Crite-
rion D). While stimulant intoxica tion occurs in individuals with stimulant use disorders, in-
toxication is not a criterion for stimulant us e disorder, which is confirmed by the presence
of two of the 11 diagnostic criteria for use disorder. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
The magnitude and direction of the behavioral  and physiological changes depend on many
variables, including the dose used and the ch aracteristics of the individual using the sub-
stance or the context (e.g., tolerance, rate of absorption, chronicity of use, context in which
it is taken). Stimulant effects such as eupho ria, increased pulse an d blood pressure, and
psychomotor activity are most commonly seen . Depressant effects such as sadness, brady-
cardia, decreased blood pressure, and decr eased psychomotor activity are less common
and generally emerge only wi th chronic high-dose use. 
Differential Diagnosis
Stimulant-induced disorders. Stimulant intoxication is distinguished from the other
stimulant-induced disorders (e.g., stimulant- induced depressive di sorder, bipolar disor-
der, psychotic disorder, anxiety disorder) because the severity of the intoxication symp-
toms exceeds that associated with the stim ulant-induced disorders, and the symptoms
warrant independent clinical attention. Stimulant intoxication delirium would be distin-
guished by a disturbance in level of  awareness and change in cognition.
Stimulant Withdrawal 569
Other mental disorders. Salient mental disturbances associated with stimulant intoxi-
cation should be distinguished from the symptoms of schizophrenia, paranoid type; bi-
polar and depressive disorders; generalized  anxiety disorder; and panic disorder as
described in DSM-5.
Stimulant Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria
A. Cessation of (or reduction in) prolonged amphetamine-type substance, cocaine, or
other stimulant use.
B. Dysphoric mood and two (or more) of the following physiological changes, developing
within a few hours to several days after Criterion A:
1. Fatigue. 
2. Vivid, unpleasant dreams.
3. Insomnia or hypersomnia.
4. Increased appetite.
5. Psychomotor retardation or agitation.
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning. 
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not
better explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from
another substance.
Specify the specific substance that causes the withdrawal syndrome  (i.e., amphet-
amine-type substance, cocaine, or other stimulant).
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code is 292.0. The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
the stimulant is an amphetamine, cocaine, or other stimulant. The ICD-10-CM code for
amphetamine or an other stimulant withdrawal is F15.23, and the ICD-10-CM for cocaine
withdrawal is F14.23. Note that the ICD-10-CM code indicates the comorbid presence of
a moderate or severe amphetamine, cocaine, or other stimulant use disorder, reflecting
the fact that amphetamine, cocaine, or other stimulant withdrawal can only occur in the
presence of a moderate or severe amphetamine, cocaine, or other stimulant use disorder.
It is not permissible to code a comorbid mild amphetamine, cocaine, or other stimulant use
disorder with amphetamine, cocaine, or other stimulant withdrawal.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of stimulant withdrawal is the presence of a characteristic with-
drawal syndrome that develops within a few hours to several days after the cessation of
(or marked reduction in) stimulant use (genera lly high dose) that has been prolonged (Cri-
terion A). The withdrawal syndrome is char acterized by the development of dysphoric
mood accompanied by two or more of the fo llowing physiological changes: fatigue, vivid
and unpleasant dreams, insomnia or hypers omnia, increased appetite, and psychomotor
retardation or agitation (Crite rion B). Bradycardia is often present and is a reliable mea-
sure of stimulant withdrawal.
Anhedonia and drug craving can often be pres ent but are not part of the diagnostic cri-
teria. These symptoms cause clinically signif icant distress or impairment in social, occu-
pational, or other important areas of functioning (Criterion C). The symptoms must not be
attributable to another medica l condition and are not better explained by another mental
disorder (Criterion D).
570 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Acute withdrawal symptoms (“a crash”) are ofte n seen after periods of repetitive high-dose
use (“runs” or “binges”). These periods are char acterized by intense and unpleasant feelings of
lassitude and depression and increased appetite, generally requiring several days of rest and
recuperation. Depressive symptoms with suicidal  ideation or behavior can occur and are gen-
erally the most serious problems seen during “crashing” or other forms of stimulant with-
drawal. The majority of individuals with st imulant use disorder experience a withdrawal
syndrome at some point, and virtually all in dividuals with the diso rder report tolerance.
Differential Diagnosis 
Stimulant use disorder and other stimulant-induced disorders. Stimulant withdrawal
is distinguished from stimulan t use disorder and from the other stimulant-induced disor-
ders (e.g., stimulant-induced intoxication delirium, depressi ve disorder, bipolar disorder,
psychotic disorder, anxiety disorder, sexual  dysfunction, sleep disorder) because the
symptoms of withdrawal predominate the clin ical presentation and are severe enough to
warrant independent clinical attention.
Other Stimulant-Induced Disorders
The following stimulant-induced disorders (w hich include amphetamine-, cocaine-, and
other stimulant–induced disorder s) are described in other chapters of the manual with dis-
orders with which they share phenomenol ogy (see the substance/medication-induced
mental disorders in these chapters): stimulan t-induced psychotic disorder (“Schizophrenia
Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders”); st imulant-induced bipolar disorder (“Bipolar
and Related Disorders”); stimulant-induced de pressive disorder (“De pressive Disorders”);
stimulant-induced anxiety disorder (“Anxiet y Disorders”); stimulant-induced obsessive-
compulsive disorder (“Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders”); stimulant-induced
sleep disorder (“Sleep-Wake Disorders”); and stimulant-induced sexual dysfunction (“Sex-
ual Dysfunctions”). For stimulant intoxication  delirium, see the criteria and discussion of
delirium in the chapter “Neurocognitive Disorders.” These stimulant-induced disorders
are diagnosed instead of stimulant intoxication or stimulant withdrawal only when the
symptoms are sufficiently severe to wa rrant independent clinical attention. 
Unspecified Stimulant-Related Disorder
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a stimulant-
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any specific stimulant-related disorder or any of the disorders in the substance-related
and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
Coding note: The ICD-9-CM code is 292.9. The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
the stimulant is an amphetamine, cocaine, or another stimulant. The ICD-10-CM code for
an unspecified amphetamine- or other stimulant-related disorder is F15.99.  The ICD-10-
CM code for an unspecified cocaine-related disorder is F14.99.
Tobacco Use Disorder 571
Tobacco-Related Disorders
Tobacco Use Disorder
Tobacco Withdrawal
Other Tobacco-Ind uced Disorders
Unspecified Tobacco-Related Disorder
Tobacco Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria  
A. A problematic pattern of tobacco use leading to clinically significant impairment or dis-
tress, as manifested by at least two of the following, occurring within a 12-month period:
1. Tobacco is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control tobacco use.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain or use tobacco.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use tobacco.
5. Recurrent tobacco use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work,
school, or home (e.g., interference with work).
6. Continued tobacco use despite having persistent or recurrent social or interper-
sonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of tobacco (e.g., arguments
with others about tobacco use).
7. Important social, occupational, or recreat ional activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of tobacco use.
8. Recurrent tobacco use in situations in which it is physically hazardous (e.g., smok-
ing in bed).
9. Tobacco use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent
physical or psychological problem that is  likely to have been caused or exacerbated
by tobacco.
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of tobacco to achieve the desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with conti nued use of the same amount of tobacco.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following:
a. The characteristic withdraw al syndrome for tobacco (refer to Criteria A and B of
the criteria set for tobacco withdrawal).
b. Tobacco (or a closely related substance, such as nicotine) is taken to relieve or
avoid withdrawal symptoms.
Specify if:
In early remission:  After full criteria for tobacco use disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria for tobacco use disorder have been met for at least 3 months but
for less than 12 months (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong de-
sire or urge to use tobacco,” may be met).
In sustained remission:  After full criteria for tobacco use disorder were previously
met, none of the criteria for tobacco use disorder have been met at any time during a
period of 12 months or longer (with the exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a
strong desire or urge to use tobacco,” may be met).
572 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Specify if:
On maintenance therapy: The individual is taking a long-term maintenance medica-
tion, such as nicotine replacement medication, and no criteria for tobacco use disorder
have been met for that class of medication (except tolerance to, or withdrawal from,
the nicotine replacement medication).
In a controlled environment:  This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to tobacco is restricted.
Coding based on current severity:  Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If a tobacco withdrawal or
tobacco-induced sleep disorder is also present, do not use the codes below for tobacco use
disorder. Instead, the comorbid tobacco use disorder is indicated in the 4th character of the
tobacco-induced disorder code (see the coding note for tobacco withdrawal or tobacco-
induced sleep disorder). For example, if ther e is comorbid tobacco-induced sleep disorder and
tobacco use disorder, only the tobacco-induced sleep disorder code is given, with the 4th char-
acter indicating whether the comorbid tobacco use disorder is moderate or severe: F17.208
for moderate or severe tobacco use disorder with tobacco-induced sleep disorder. It is not per-
missible to code a comorbid mild tobacco use disorder with a tobacco-induced sleep disorder.
Specify current severity:
305.1 (Z72.0) Mild:  Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
305.1 (F17.200) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
305.1 (F17.200) Severe:  Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
Specifiers
“On maintenance therapy” applies as a further specifier to individuals being maintained on
other tobacco cessation me dication (e.g., bupropio n, varenicline) and as  a further specifier of
remission if the individual is both in remissi on and on maintenance therapy. “In a controlled
environment” applies as a further specifier of re mission if the individual is both in remission
and in a controlled environment (i.e., in early remission in a controlled environment or in sus-
tained remission in a controlled environment). Examples of these environments are closely su-
pervised and substance-free jails, therapeutic communities, and locked hospital units. 
Diagnostic Features
Tobacco use disorder is common among individu als who use cigarettes and smokeless to-
bacco daily and is uncommon among individuals who do not use tobacco daily or who use
nicotine medications. Tolerance to tobacco is exemplified by the disappearance of nausea
and dizziness after repeated intake and with a more intense effect of tobacco the first time
it is used during the day. Cessation of to bacco use can produce a well-defined withdrawal
syndrome. Many individuals with tobacco use disorder use tobacco to relieve or to avoid
withdrawal symptoms (e.g., after being in a sit uation where use is restricted). Many indi-
viduals who use tobacco have tobacco-relat ed physical symptoms or diseases and con-
tinue to smoke. The large majority report crav ing when they do not smoke for several hours.
Spending excessive time usin g tobacco can be exemplified by chain-smoking (i.e., smok-
ing one cigarette after another with no time between cigarettes). Because tobacco sources
are readily and legally available, and because nicotine intoxication is very rare, spending a
great deal of time attempting to procure toba cco or recovering from its effects is uncom-
mon. Giving up important social, occupational , or recreational acti vities can occur when
an individual forgoes an activity because it occurs in tobacco use–restricted areas. Use of
tobacco rarely results in failu re to fulfill major role obligat ions (e.g., in terference with
work, interference with home obligations), bu t persistent social or interpersonal problems
(e.g., having arguments with others about to bacco use, avoiding social situations because
of others’ disapproval of tobacco use) or use that is physically hazardous (e.g., smoking in
Tobacco Use Disorder 573
bed, smoking around flammable chemicals) oc cur at an intermediate prevalence. Although
these criteria are less often endorsed by toba cco users, if endorsed, they can indicate a
more severe disorder.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Smoking within 30 minutes of waking, smoking daily, smoking more cigarettes per day,
and waking at night to smoke are associated with tobacco use di sorder. Environmental
cues can evoke craving and withdrawal. Serious medical conditions, such as lung and
other cancers, cardiac and pulmonary disease , perinatal problems, cough, shortness of
breath, and accelerated skin aging, often occur.
Prevalence
Cigarettes are the most commonly used toba cco product, representing over 90% of to-
bacco/nicotine use. In the United States, 57% of adults have never been smokers, 22% are
former smokers, and 21% are current smokers.  Approximately 20% of current U.S. smok-
ers are nondaily smokers. The prevalence of sm okeless tobacco use is less than 5%, and the
prevalence of tobacco use in pipes and cigars is less than 1%. 
DSM-IV nicotine dependence criteria can be used to estimate the prevalence of tobacco
use disorder, but since they are a subset of to bacco use disorder criteria, the prevalence of
tobacco use disorder will be somewhat greater. The 12-month prevalence of DSM-IV nic-
otine dependence in the United States is 13% among adults age 18 years and older. Rates
are similar among adult males (14%) and fe males (12%) and decline in age from 17%
among 18- to 29-year-old s to 4% among individuals age 65 years and older. The prevalence
of current nicotine dependence is greate r among Native American and Alaska Natives
(23%) than among whites (14%) but is less am ong African Americans (10%), Asian Amer-
icans and Pacific Islanders (6%), and Hispan ics (6%). The prevalence among current daily
smokers is approximately 50%.
In many developing nations, the prevalence  of smoking is much greater in males than
in females, but this is not the case in develope d nations. However, ther e often is a lag in the
demographic transition such that smoking increases in females at a later time. 
Development and Course
The majority of U.S. adolescents experiment with tobacco use, and by age 18 years, about
20% smoke at least monthly. Most of these in dividuals become daily tobacco users. Initi-
ation of smoking after age 21 years is rare. In general, some of the to bacco use disorder cri-
teria symptoms occur soon after beginning to bacco use, and many individuals’ pattern of
use meets current tobacco use diso rder criteria by late adolescence. More than 80% of in-
dividuals who use tobacco atte mpt to quit at some time, but 60% relapse within 1 week
and less than 5% remain abstinent for life . However, most indivi duals who use tobacco
make multiple attempts such that one-half of  tobacco users eventually abstain. Individuals
who use tobacco who do quit usually do not do  so until after age 30 years. Although non-
daily smoking in the United States was previ ously rare, it has beco me more prevalent in
the last decade, especially among younger individuals who use tobacco. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Individuals with externalizing pers onality traits are more likely to
initiate tobacco use. Children with attentio n-deficit/hyperactivity disorder or conduct
disorder, and adults with depr essive, bipolar, anxiety, pers onality, psychotic, or other
substance use disorders, are at higher risk of starting and continuing tobacco use and of to-
bacco use disorder.
574 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Environmental. Individuals with low incomes and low educational levels are more likely
to initiate tobacco use an d are less likely to stop.
Genetic and physiological. Genetic factors contribute to the onset of tobacco use, the
continuation of tobacco use, and the developm ent of tobacco use disorder, with a degree of
heritability equivalent to that observed with other substance use disorders (i.e., about
50%). Some of this risk is specific to toba cco, and some is common with the vulnerability to
developing any substance use disorder. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues 
Cultures and subcultures vary widely in their acceptance of the use of tobacco. The prev-
alence of tobacco use declined in the United  States from the 1960s through the 1990s, but
this decrease has been less evident in Africa n American and Hispanic populations. Also,
smoking in developing countries is more prev alent than in developed nations. The degree
to which these cultural differences are due to  income, education, and tobacco control ac-
tivities in a country is unclear. Non-Hispan ic white smokers appear to be more likely to
develop tobacco use disorder than are smoker s. Some ethnic differences may be biologi-
cally based. African American males tend to have higher nicotine blood levels for a given
number of cigarettes, and this might contribute  to greater difficulty in quitting. Also, the
speed of nicotine metabolism is significantly different for whites compared with African
Americans and can vary by genotypes associated with ethnicities.
Diagnostic Markers
Carbon monoxide in the breath, and nicotine and its metabolite cotinine in blood, saliva, or
urine, can be used to measure the extent of cu rrent tobacco or nicotine use; however, these
are only weakly related to tobacco use disorder. 
Functional Consequences of Tobacco Use Disorder
Medical consequences of tobacco use often be gin when tobacco users are in their 40s and
usually become progressively more debilitat ing over time. One-half of smokers who do
not stop using tobacco will die early from a tobacco-related illness, and smoking-related
morbidity occurs in more than one-half of tobacco users. Most medical conditions result
from exposure to carbon monoxide, tars, an d other non-nicotine components of tobacco.
The major predictor of reversibility is duration of smoking. Secondhand smoke increases
the risk of heart disease and cancer by 30%. Long-term use of nicotine medications does
not appear to cause medical harm. 
Comorbidity
The most common medical diseases from smoking are cardiovascular illnesses, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, and cancers. Smoking also increases perinatal problems,
such as low birth weight and miscarriage. Th e most common psychiat ric comorbidities are
alcohol/substance, depressive, bipolar, anxiet y, personality, and attention-deficit/hyper-
activity disorders. In individuals with curren t tobacco use disorder, the prevalence of cur-
rent alcohol, drug, anxiety, depressive, bi polar, and personality disorders ranges from
22% to 32%. Nicotine-dependent smokers are 2.7–8.1 times more likely to have these dis-
orders than nondependent smokers, never-smokers, or ex-smokers.
Tobacco Withdrawal 575
Tobacco Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria 292.0 (F17.203)
A. Daily use of tobacco for at least several weeks.
B. Abrupt cessation of tobacco use, or reduction in the amount of tobacco used, followed
within 24 hours by four (or more) of the following signs or symptoms:
1. Irritability, frustration, or anger.
2. Anxiety.
3. Difficulty concentrating.
4. Increased appetite.
5. Restlessness.
6. Depressed mood.
7. Insomnia.
C. The signs or symptoms in Criterion B cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The signs or symptoms are not attributed to another medical condition and are not bet-
ter explained by another mental disorder, including intoxication or withdrawal from an-
other substance.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.0. The ICD-10-CM code for tobacco withdrawal
is F17.203. Note that the ICD-10-CM code indicates the comorbid presence of a moderate
or severe tobacco use disorder, reflecting the fact that tobacco withdrawal can only occur
in the presence of a moderate or severe toba cco use disorder. It is not permissible to code
a comorbid mild tobacco use disorder with tobacco withdrawal.
Diagnostic Features
Withdrawal symptoms impair the ability to st op tobacco use. The symptoms after absti-
nence from tobacco are in large part due to nicotine deprivation. Symptoms are much
more intense among individuals who smoke cigarettes or use smokeless tobacco than
among those who use nicotine medications. This difference in symptom intensity is likely
due to the more rapid onset and higher levels of nicotine with cigarette smoking. Tobacco
withdrawal is common among daily tobacco users who stop or reduce but can also occur
among nondaily users. Typically, heart rate decreases by 5–12 beats per minute in the first
few days after stopping smoking, and weight increases an average of 4–7 lb (2–3 kg) over
the first year after stopping smoking. Tobacco withdrawal can produce clinically signifi-
cant mood changes and functional impairment. 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Craving for sweet or sugary foods and impaired performance on tasks requiring vigilance
are associated with tobacco withdrawal. Abstinence can increase constipation, coughing,
dizziness, dreaming/nightmare s, nausea, and sore throat. Smoking increases the metab-
olism of many medications used to treat mental disorders; thus, cessation of smoking can
increase the blood levels of these medications, and this can produce clinically significant
outcomes. This effect appears to be due not to nicotine but rather  to other compounds in
tobacco. 
576 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Prevalence
Approximately 50% of tobacco users who quit for 2 or more days will have symptoms that
meet criteria for tobacco withdrawal. The most commonly endorsed signs and symptoms
are anxiety, irritability, and difficulty concentrating. The least commonly endorsed symp-
toms are depression and insomnia. 
Development and Course
Tobacco withdrawal usually begins within 24 hours of stopping or cutting down on to-
bacco use, peaks at 2–3 days after abstinence, and lasts 2–3 weeks. Tobacco withdrawal
symptoms can occur among adolescent tobacco users, even prior to daily tobacco use. Pro-
longed symptoms beyond 1 month are uncommon. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Temperamental. Smokers with depressive disorders,  bipolar disorders, anxiety disor-
ders, attention-deficit/hypera ctivity disorder, and other substance use disorders have
more severe withdrawal.
Genetic and physiological. Genotype can influence the probability of withdrawal upon
abstinence. 
Diagnostic Markers
Carbon monoxide in the breath, and nicotine and its metabolite cotinine in blood, saliva, or
urine, can be used to measure the extent of tobacco or nicotine use but are only weakly re-
lated to tobacco withdrawal.
Functional Consequences  of Tobacco Withdrawal
Abstinence from cigarettes can cause clinically significant distress. Withdrawal impairs
the ability to stop or control tobacco use. Whether tobacco withdraw al can prompt a new
mental disorder or recurrence of  a mental disorder is debatable,  but if this occurs, it would
be in a small minority of tobacco users. 
Differential Diagnosis
The symptoms of tobacco with drawal overlap with those of other substance withdrawal
syndromes (e.g., alcohol withdrawal; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal; stim-
ulant withdrawal; caffeine withdrawal; opioid withdrawal); caffeine intoxication; anxiety,
depressive, bipolar, and sleep disorders; an d medication-induced akathisia. Admission to
smoke-free inpatient units or voluntary smoking cessation ca n induce withdrawal symp-
toms that mimic, intensify, or disguise othe r disorders or adverse effects of medications
used to treat mental disorders (e.g., irritabi lity thought to be du e to alcohol withdrawal
could be due to tobacco with drawal). Reduction in sympto ms with the use of nicotine
medications confirms the diagnosis. 
Other Tobacco-Induced Disorders
Tobacco-induced sleep disorder is discussed in the chapter “Sleep -Wake Disorders” (see
“Substance/Medication-In duced Sleep Disorder”).
Unspecified Tobacco-Related Disorder 577
Unspecified Tobacco-Related Disorder
292.9 (F17.209)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a tobacco-
related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full criteria
for any specific tobacco-related disorder or any of the disorders in the substance-related
and addictive disorders diagnostic class.
Other (or Unknown) 
Substance–Related Disorders
Other (or Unknown) Su bstance Use Disorder
Other (or Unknown) Substance Intoxication
Other (or Unknown) Substance Withdrawal
Other (or Unknown) Subs tance–Induced Disorders
Unspecified Other (or Unknown)  Substance–Related Disorder
Other (or Unknown) Substance Use Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria
A. A problematic pattern of use of an intoxicating substance not able to be classified
within the alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; hallucinogen (phencyclidine and others); inhal-
ant; opioid; sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic; stimulant; or tobacco categories and lead-
ing to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by at least two of the
following, occurring within a 12-month period: 
1. The substance is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was
intended.
2. There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control use of the
substance.
3. A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the substance, use the
substance, or recover from its effects.
4. Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the substance.
5. Recurrent use of the substance resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations
at work, school, or home.
6. Continued use of the substance despite having persistent or recurrent social or in-
terpersonal problems caused or exacerbated by the effects of its use.
7. Important social, occupational, or recreat ional activities are given up or reduced be-
cause of use of the substance.
8. Recurrent use of the substance in situations in which it is physically hazardous.
9. Use of the substance is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or re-
current physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or ex-
acerbated by the substance.
578 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
10. Tolerance, as defined by either of the following:
a. A need for markedly increased amounts of the substance to achieve intoxication
or desired effect.
b. A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the sub-
stance.
11. Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: 
a. The characteristic withdrawal syndrome fo r other (or unknown) substance (refer to
Criteria A and B of the criteria sets fo r other [or unknown] substance withdrawal,
p. 583).
b. The substance (or a closely related substance) is taken to relieve or avoid with-
drawal symptoms.
Specify if:
In early remission:  After full criteria for other (or unknown) substance use disorder were
previously met, none of the criteria for other (or unknown) substance use disorder have
been met for at least 3 months but for less than 12 months (with the exception that Cri-
terion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the substance,” may be met).
In sustained remission:  After full criteria for other (or unknown) substance use disor-
der were previously met, none of the criteria  for other (or unknown) substance use dis-
order have been met at any time during a period of 12 months or longer (with the
exception that Criterion A4, “Craving, or a strong desire or urge to use the substance,”
may be met).
Specify if:
In a controlled environment:  This additional specifier is used if the individual is in an
environment where access to the substance is restricted.
Coding based on current severity:  Note for ICD-10-CM codes: If an other (or unknown) sub-
stance intoxication, other (or unknown) substance withdrawal, or another other (or unknown)
substance–induced mental disorder is present, do not use the codes below for other (or un-
known) substance use disorder. Instead, the comorbid other (or unknown) substance use dis-
order is indicated in the 4th character of the other (or unknown) substance–induced disorder
code (see the coding note for other (or unknown) substance intoxication, other (or unknown)
substance withdrawal, or specific other (or unknown) substance–induced mental disorder).
For example, if there is comorbid other (or unknown) substance–induced depressive disorder
and other (or unknown) substance use disorder, only the other (or unknown) substance–
induced depressive disorder code is given, with the 4th character indicating whether the co-
morbid other (or unknown) substance use disorder  is mild, moderate, or severe: F19.14 for
other (or unknown) substance use disorder with other (or unknown) substance–induced de-
pressive disorder or F19.24 for a moderate or severe other (or unknown) substance use dis-
order with other (or unknown) substance–induced depressive disorder.
Specify current severity:
305.90 (F19.10) Mild:  Presence of 2–3 symptoms.
304.90 (F19.20) Moderate: Presence of 4–5 symptoms.
304.90 (F19.20) Severe:  Presence of 6 or more symptoms.
Specifiers
“In a controlled environment” app lies as a further specifier of remission if the individual is
both in remission and in a controlled environm ent (i.e., in early remission in a controlled
environment or in sustained remission in a controlled environmen t). Examples of these
environments are closely supe rvised and substanc e-free jails, therapeutic communities,
and locked hospital units. 
Other (or Unknown) Substance Use Disorder 579
Diagnostic Features
The diagnostic class other (or unknown) su bstance use and related disorders comprises
substance-related disorders unrelated to alco hol; caffeine; cannabis; hallucinogens (phen-
cyclidine and others); inhalants; opioids; sedative, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimulants
(including amphetamine and cocaine); or tobacco. Such substances include anabolic ste-
roids; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; cortisol; antiparkinsoni an medications; an-
tihistamines; nitrous oxide; amyl-, butyl-, or isobutyl-nitrites; betel nut, which is chewed
in many cultures to produce mild euphoria an d a floating sensation;  kava (from a South
Pacific pepper plant), which produces sedation , incoordination, weight loss, mild hepati-
tis, and lung abnormalities; or cathinones (including khât plant agents and synthetic chem-
ical derivatives) that produce stimulant effe cts. Unknown substance- related disorders are
associated with unidentified substances, such as intoxications in which the individual can-
not identify the ingested drug, or substance use disorders involving either new, black mar-
ket drugs not yet identified or familia r drugs illegally sold under false names.
Other (or unknown) substance use disorder is  a mental disorder in which repeated use
of an other or unknown substance typically continues, despite the individual’s knowing
that the substance is causing serious problems  for the individual. Th ose problems are re-
flected in the diagnostic criteria . When the substance is known, it should be reflected in the
name of the disorder upon coding (e.g., nitrous oxide use disorder).
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
A diagnosis of other (or unknown) substance us e disorder is supporte d by the individual’s
statement that the substance involved is not among the nine classes listed in this chapter; by re-
curring episodes of intoxication with negative results in standard drug  screens (which may not
detect new or rarely used substances); or by the presence of symptoms characteristic of an un-
identified substance that has newly appeared in the individual’s community.
Because of increased access to nitrous oxide (“laughing ga s”), membership in certain
populations is associated with diagnosis of ni trous oxide use disorder. The role of this gas
as an anesthetic agent leads to misuse by so me medical and dental professionals. Its use as
a propellant for commercial products (e.g., whipped cream dispensers) contributes to
misuse by food service workers. With recent  widespread availability of the substance in
“whippet” cartridges for use in home whipped cream dispensers, ni trous oxide misuse by
adolescents and young adults is significant, especially among those who also inhale vola-
tile hydrocarbons. Some continuously usin g individuals, inhaling from as many as 240
whippets per day, may present with serious medical complications and mental conditions,
including myeloneuropathy, spinal cord su bacute combined degeneration, peripheral
neuropathy, and psychosis. These conditions are also associated with a diagnosis of ni-
trous oxide use disorder. 
Use of amyl-, butyl-, and iso butyl nitrite gases has been  observed among homosexual
men and some adolescents, especially those with conduct disorder. Membership in these
populations may be associated with a diagnosis of amyl-, butyl-, or is obutyl-nitrite use dis-
order. However, it has not been determined that these substances produce a substance use
disorder. Despite tolerance, these gases may no t alter behavior through central effects, and
they may be used only for their peripheral effects.
Substance use disorders generall y are associated with elevated risks of suicide, but there
is no evidence of unique risk factors for suicide with other (or unknown) substance use
disorder.
Prevalence
Based on extremely limited data, the prevalence of other (or unknown) substance use disorder
is likely lower than that of use disorders involv ing the nine substance classes in this chapter. 
580 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Development and Course
No single pattern of development or course  characterizes the pharmacologically varied
other (or unknown) substance use disorders.  Often unknown substance use disorders will
be reclassified when the unknown substance eventually is identified. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk and prognostic factors for other (or un known) substance use disorders are thought to
be similar to those for most substance use disorders and include the presence of any other
substance use disorders, conduct disorder, or antisocial personality disorder in the indi-
vidual or the individual’s family; early onse t of substance problems ; easy availability of
the substance in the individual’s environment; childhood maltreatment or trauma; and ev-
idence of limited early self-control and behavioral disinhibition. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Certain cultures may be associated with ot her (or unknown) substance use disorders in-
volving specific indigenous substances with in the cultural region, such as betel nut.
Diagnostic Markers
Urine, breath, or saliva tests may correctly identify a commonly used substance falsely
sold as a novel product. However, routine clin ical tests usually cannot identify truly un-
usual or new substances, which may requir e testing in specialized laboratories. 
Differential Diagnosis
Use of other or unknown substances without meeting criteria for other (or unknown)
substance use disorder. Use of unknown substances is not rare among adolescents, but
most use does not meet the diag nostic standard of two or mo re criteria for other (or un-
known) substance use disorder in the past year.
Substance use disorders. Other (or unknown) substanc e use disorder may co-occur
with various substance use diso rders, and the symptoms of the disorders may be similar
and overlapping. To disentangle symptom pattern s, it is helpful to  inquire about which
symptoms persisted during periods when some  of the substances were not being used.
Other (or unknown) substance/medication-induced disorder. This diagnosis should
be differentiated from instances when the indi vidual’s symptoms meet full criteria for one
of the following disorders, and that disorder is caused by an other or unknown substance:
delirium, major or mild  neurocognitive disorder, psychoti c disorder, depressive disorder,
anxiety disorder, sexual dysf unction, or sleep disorder.
Other medical conditions. Individuals with substance us e disorders, including other
(or unknown) substance use disorder, may present with symptoms of many medical dis-
orders. These disorders also may occur in the absence of other (or unknown) substance use
disorder. A history of little or no use of ot her or unknown substances helps to exclude
other (or unknown) substance use disord er as the source of these problems.
Comorbidity
Substance use disorders, including other (o r unknown) substance use disorder, are com-
monly comorbid with one another, with adol escent conduct disorder  and adult antisocial
personality disorder, and with suicid al ideation and suicide attempts.
Other (or Unknown) Substance Intoxication 581
Other (or Unknown) Substance Intoxication
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The development of a reversible substance-specific syndrome attributable to recent in-
gestion of (or exposure to) a substance that is not listed elsewhere or is unknown.
B. Clinically significant problematic behavioral or psychological changes that are attribut-
able to the effect of the substance on the central nervous system (e.g., impaired motor
coordination, psychomotor agitation or retardation, euphoria, anxiety, belligerence,
mood lability, cognitive impairment, impaired judgment, social withdrawal) and develop
during, or shortly after, use of the substance.
C. The signs or symptoms are not attributable to another medical condition and are not bet-
ter explained by another mental disorder, in cluding intoxication with another substance.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.89. The ICD-10-CM code depends on whether
there is a comorbid other (or unknown) substance use disorder involving the same sub-
stance. If a mild other (or unknown) substance use disorder is comorbid, the ICD-10-CM
code is F19.129,  and if a moderate or severe other (or unknown) substance use disorder is
comorbid, the ICD-10-CM code is F19.229. If there is no comorbid other (or unknown) sub-
stance use disorder involving the same substance, then the ICD-10-CM code is F19.929.
Note:  For information on Risk and Prognostic Factors, Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues,
and Diagnostic Markers, see the correspondin g sections in other (or unknown) substance
use disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Other (or unknown) substance intoxication is a clinically significant mental disorder that
develops during, or immediately after, use of either a) a substance not elsewhere ad-
dressed in this chapter (i.e., alcohol; caff eine; cannabis; phencyclidine and other halluci-
nogens; inhalants; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics , or anxiolytics; stimulants; or tobacco) or
b) an unknown substance. If the substance is known, it should be reflected in the name of
the disorder upon coding.
Application of the diagnostic criteria for other (or unknow n) substance intoxication is
very challenging. Criterion A requires development of a reversible “substance-specific
syndrome,” but if the substance is unknown, that syndrome usually will be unknown. To
resolve this conflict, clinicians may ask the in dividual or obtain co llateral history as to
whether the individual has experienced a similar episode after using substances with the
same “street” name or from the same source . Similarly, hospital emergency departments
sometimes recognize over a few days numerous presentations of a severe, unfamiliar in-
toxication syndrome from a newly available,  previously unknown substance. Because of
the great variety of intoxicating substances, Criterion B can provide only broad examples
of signs and symptoms from some intoxications, with no  threshold for the number of
symptoms required for a diagnosis; clinical judgment guides those decisions. Criterion C
requires ruling out other medical conditio ns, mental disorders, or intoxications.
Prevalence
The prevalence of other (or unknown) substance intoxication is unknown.
Development and Course
Intoxications usually appear and then peak minu tes to hours after use of the substance, but
the onset and course vary with the substanc e and the route of administration. Generally,
582 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
substances used by pulmonary inhalation and intravenous injection have the most rapid
onset of action, while those ingested by mouth and requiring metabolism to an active
product are much slower. (For example, after ingestion of certain mushrooms, the first
signs of an eventually fatal intoxication may not appear for a few days.) Intoxication ef-
fects usually resolve within hours to a very  few days. However, the body may completely
eliminate an anesthetic gas such as nitrous ox ide just minutes after use ends. At the other
extreme, some “hit-and-run” intoxicating su bstances poison systems, leaving permanent
impairments. For example, MPTP (1-methyl- 4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine), a con-
taminating by-product in the synthesis of a certain opioid, kills dopaminergic cells and in-
duces permanent parkinsonism in user s who sought opioid intoxication. 
Functional Consequences of 
Other (or Unknown) Substance Intoxication
Impairment from intoxication with any subs tance may have serious consequences, includ-
ing dysfunction at work, social indiscretions, problems in interpersonal relationships, fail-
ure to fulfill role obligations, traffic accide nts, fighting, high-risk behaviors (i.e., having
unprotected sex), and substance or medication  overdose. The pattern of consequences will
vary with the particular substance.
Differential Diagnosis
Use of other or unknown substance, without meeting criteria for other (or unknown)
substance intoxication. The individual used an other or unknown substance(s), but the
dose was insufficient to produce symptoms that meet the diag nostic criteria required for
the diagnosis.
Substance intoxication or other subs tance/medication-induced disorders. Familiar sub-
stances may be sold in the black market as novel products, and individuals may experience
intoxication from those substances. History, to xicology screens, or chemical testing of the
substance itself may help to identify it.
Different types of other (or unknown) substance–related disorders. Episodes of other
(or unknown) substance intoxication may occur during, but are distinct from, other (or un-
known) substance use disorder, unspecified other (or unknown) substance–related disor-
der, and other (or unknown) substance–induced disorders. 
Other toxic, metabolic, traumatic, neoplastic, vascular, or infectious  disorders that impair
brain function and cognition. Numerous neurological and other medical conditions may
produce rapid onset of signs and symptoms mimi cking those of intoxica tions, including the
examples in Criterion B. Parado xically, drug withdrawals also must be ruled out, because, for
example, lethargy may indicate withdrawal from one drug or intoxication with another drug.
Comorbidity
As with all substance-related disorders, adolescent conduct disorder, adult antisocial per-
sonality disorder, and other subs tance use disorders tend to co-occur with other (or un-
known) substance intoxication.
Other (or Unknown) Substance Withdrawal 583
Other (or Unknown) Substance Withdrawal
Diagnostic Criteria 292.0 (F19.239)
A. Cessation of (or reduction in) use of a substance that has been heavy and prolonged.
B. The development of a substance-specific syndrome shortly after the cessation of (or
reduction in) substance use.
C. The substance-specific syndrome causes clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
D. The symptoms are not attributable to anot her medical condition and are not better ex-
plained by another mental disorder, including withdrawal from another substance.
E. The substance involved cannot be classified under any of the other substance catego-
ries (alcohol; caffeine; cannabis; opioids; sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics; stimu-
lants; or tobacco) or is unknown.
Coding note:  The ICD-9-CM code is 292.0. The ICD-10-CM code for other (or unknown) sub-
stance withdrawal is F19.239. Note that the ICD-10-CM code indicates the comorbid presence
of a moderate or severe other (or unknown) substance use disorder. It is not permissible to
code a comorbid mild other (or unknown) substance use disorder with other (or unknown) sub-
stance withdrawal.
Note:  For information on Risk and Prognostic Fa ctors and Diagnostic Markers, see the cor-
responding sections in other (or unknown) substance use disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Other (or unknown) substance withdrawal is a clinically significant mental disorder that
develops during, or within a few hours to days  after, reducing or terminating dosing with
a substance (Criteria A and B). Although recent  dose reduction or termination usually is
clear in the history, other diagnostic procedur es are very challenging if the drug is un-
known. Criterion B requires development of a “substance-specific syndrome” (i.e., the in-
dividual’s signs and sympto ms must correspond with th e known withdrawal syndrome
for the recently stopped drug)—a requirement that rarely can be met with an unknown
substance. Consequently, clinical judgment must guide such decisions when information
is this limited. Criterion D requ ires ruling out other medical conditions, mental disorders,
or withdrawals from familiar substances. When  the substance is known, it should be re-
flected in the name of the disorder upon coding (e.g., betel nut withdrawal).
Prevalence
The prevalence of other (or unknown) substance withdrawal is unknown.
Development and Course
Withdrawal signs commonly appe ar some hours after use of the substance is terminated,
but the onset and course vary greatly, depending on the dose typically used by the person
and the rate of elimination of the specific su bstance from the body. At peak severity, with-
drawal symptoms from some substances involve only mode rate levels of discomfort,
whereas withdrawal from other substances may be fatal. Withdrawal-associated dyspho-
ria often motivates relapse to substance us e. Withdrawal symptoms slowly abate over
days, weeks, or months, depending on the particular drug and dose s to which the indi-
vidual became tolerant.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Culture-related issues in diagnosis will vary with the particular substance.
584 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Functional Consequences of 
Other (or Unknown) Substance Withdrawal
Withdrawal from any substance may have serious consequences, including physical signs
and symptoms (e.g., malaise, vi tal sign changes, abdominal distress, headache), intense
drug craving, anxiety, depre ssion, agitation, psychotic symp toms, or cognitive impairments.
These consequences may lead to problems such  as dysfunction at work, problems in in-
terpersonal relationships, failure to fulfill role  obligations, traffic accidents, fighting, high-
risk behavior (e.g., having unprotected sex), suicide attempts, and substance or medica-
tion overdose. The pattern of consequences will vary with the particular substance.
Differential Diagnosis
Dose reduction after extended dosing, but no t meeting the criteria for other (or un-
known) substance withdrawal. The individual used other (or unknown) substances,
but the dose that was used was insufficient to  produce symptoms that meet the criteria re-
quired for the diagnosis.
Substance withdrawal or other substance/medication-induced disorders. Familiar
substances may be sold in the black market as novel products, and individuals may expe-
rience withdrawal when discontinuing those substances. History, toxicology screens, or
chemical testing of the substance itself may help to identify it. 
Different types of other (or unknown) substance–related disorders. Episodes of other
(or unknown) substance withdrawal may occur during, but are distinct  from, other (or un-
known) substance use disorder, unspecified other (or unknown) substance–related disor-
der, and unspecified other (or unkn own) substance–induced disorders.
Other toxic, metabolic, traumatic, neoplastic, vascular, or infectious disorders that im-
pair brain function and cognition. Numerous neurological and other medical condi-
tions may produce rapid onset of signs and symptoms mimi cking those of withdrawals.
Paradoxically, drug intoxications also must be ruled out, because, for example, lethargy
may indicate withdrawal from one drug  or intoxication with another drug.
Comorbidity
As with all substance-related disorders, adolescent conduct disorder, adult antisocial per-
sonality disorder, and other substance use disorders likely co-occur with other (or un-
known) substance withdrawal.
Other (or Unknown) 
Substance–Induced Disorders
Because the category of other or unknown subs tances is inherently ill-defined, the extent
and range of induced disorders are uncertain. Nevertheless, othe r (or unknown) sub-
stance–induced disorders are possible and are described in other chapters of the manual
with disorders with which they share phenomenology (see the substance/medication-
induced mental disorders in these chapters): other (or unknown) substance–induced psy-
chotic disorder (“Schizophren ia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders”); other (or un-
known substance–induced bipolar disorder (“ Bipolar and Related Disorders”); other (or
unknown) substance–induced depressive diso rder (“Depressive Disorders”); other (or
unknown) substance–induced anxiety disorders (“Anxiety Disorders”); other (or un-
known) substance–induced obsessive-compu lsive disorder (“Obsessive-Compulsive and
Related Disorders”); other (or unknown) substance–indu ced sleep disorder (“Sleep-Wake
Unspecified Other (or Unknown) Substance–Related Disorder 585
Disorders”); other (or unknown) substance–induced sexual dysfunction (“Sexual Dys-
functions”); and other (or un known) substance/me dication–induced major or mild neu-
rocognitive disorder (“Neurocognitive Diso rders”). For other (or unknown) substance–
induced intoxication delirium and other (o r unknown) substance–induced withdrawal
delirium, see the criteria and discussion of delirium in the chapter “Neurocognitive Dis-
orders.” These other (or unknown) substanc e–induced disorders are diagnosed instead of
other (or unknown) substance intoxication or other (or unknown) substance withdrawal
only when the symptoms are sufficiently seve re to warrant independent clinical attention.
Unspecified Other (or Unknown)
Substance–Related Disorder
292.9 (F19.99)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of an other (or un-
known) substance–related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment
in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not
meet the full criteria for any specific other  (or unknown) substance–related disorder or any
of the disorders in the substance-related disorders diagnostic class.
Non-Substance-Related Disorders
Gambling Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 312.31 (F63.0)
A. Persistent and recurrent problematic gambling behavior leading to clinically significant
impairment or distress, as indicated by the individual exhibiting four (or more) of the fol-
lowing in a 12-month period:
1. Needs to gamble with increasing amounts of money in order to achieve the desired
excitement.
2. Is restless or irritable when attempting to cut down or stop gambling.
3. Has made repeated unsuccessful efforts to control, cut back, or stop gambling.
4. Is often preoccupied with gambling (e.g., having persistent thoughts of reliving past
gambling experiences, handicapping or planni ng the next venture, thinking of ways
to get money with which to gamble).
5. Often gambles when feeling distressed (e.g., helpless, guilty, anxious, depressed).
6. After losing money gambling, often returns another day to get even (“chasing” one’s
losses).
7. Lies to conceal the extent of involvement with gambling.
8. Has jeopardized or lost a significant rela tionship, job, or educational or career op-
portunity because of gambling.
9. Relies on others to provide money to relieve desperate financial situations caused
by gambling.
B. The gambling behavior is not better explained by a manic episode.
586 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
Specify if:
Episodic:  Meeting diagnostic criteria at more than one time point, with symptoms sub-
siding between periods of gambling disorder for at least several months.
Persistent:  Experiencing continuous symptoms, to meet diagnostic criteria for multiple
years.
Specify if:
In early remission:  After full criteria for gambling disorder were previously met, none
of the criteria for gambling disorder have been met for at least 3 months but for less
than 12 months.
In sustained remission:  After full criteria for gambling disorder were previously met,
none of the criteria for gambling disorder have been met during a period of 12 months
or longer.
Specify current severity:
Mild:  4–5 criteria met.
Moderate: 6–7 criteria met.
Severe:  8–9 criteria met.
Note:  Although some behavioral conditions th at do not involve in gestion of substances
have similarities to substance-related disorders, only one disord er—gambling disorder—
has sufficient data to be included in this section.
Specifiers
Severity is based on the number of criteria endorsed. Individuals with mild gambling dis-
order may exhibit only 4–5 of the criteria, with  the most frequently endorsed criteria usu-
ally related to preoccupation with gamb ling and “chasing” losses. Individuals with
moderately severe gambli ng disorder exhibit more of the criteria (i.e., 6–7). Individuals
with the most severe form will exhibit all or mo st of the nine criteria  (i.e., 8–9). Jeopardiz-
ing relationships or career o pportunities due to gambling and relying on others to provide
money for gambling losses are typically the least  often endorsed criteria and most often oc-
cur among those with more severe gambling disorder. Furthermore,  individuals present-
ing for treatment of gambling disorder typically have moderate to severe forms of the
disorder.
Diagnostic Features
Gambling involves risking something of value in the hopes of obtaining something of
greater value. In many cultur es, individuals gamble on game s and events, and most do so
without experiencing problems. However, so me individuals develo p substantial impair-
ment related to their gambling behaviors. Th e essential feature of gambling disorder is
persistent and recurrent maladaptive gambling behavior that disrupts personal, family,
and/or vocational pursuits (Criterion A). Gamb ling disorder is defined as a cluster of four
or more of the symptoms listed in Criterion A occurring at any time in the same 12-month
period.
A pattern of “chasing one’s losses” may deve lop, with an urgent need to keep gam-
bling (often with the placing of larger bets or the taking of greater risks) to undo a loss or
series of losses. The individual may abandon his or her gambling strategy and try to win
back losses all at once. Although many gamblers may “chase” for short periods of time, it
is the frequent, and often long-term, “chase” that is characteristic of gambling disorder
(Criterion A6). Individuals may lie to family members, therapists, or others to conceal the
extent of involvement with gambling; these instances of deceit may also include, but
are not limited to, covering up illegal behaviors such as forgery, fraud, theft, or embez-
zlement to obtain money with which to gamble (Criterion A7). Individuals may also en-
Gambling Disorder 587
gage in “bailout” behavior, turning to family or others for help with  a desperate financial
situation that was caused by gambling (Criterion A9). 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis 
Distortions in thinking (e.g., denial, superstitions, a sense of power and control over the
outcome of chance events, overconfidence) ma y be present in individuals with gambling
disorder. Many individuals with gambling diso rder believe that money is both the cause
of and the solution to their problems. Some individuals with gambling disorder are im-
pulsive, competitive, energetic, restless, an d easily bored; they may be overly concerned
with the approval of others and may be gene rous to the point of extravagance when win-
ning. Other individuals with gambling disord er are depressed and lonely, and they may
gamble when feeling helpless, guilty, or depres sed. Up to half of individuals in treatment
for gambling disorder have suicidal ideati on, and about 17% have attempted suicide.
Prevalence 
The past-year prevalence rate of gambling di sorder is about 0.2%–0.3% in the general pop-
ulation. In the general population, the lifetim e prevalence rate is about 0.4%–1.0%. For fe-
males, the lifetime prevalence rate of gambling disorder is about 0.2%, and for males it is
about 0.6%. The lifetime prevalence of path ological gambling among African Americans is
about 0.9%, among whites about 0.4% , and among Hispanics about 0.3%. 
Development and Course 
The onset of gambling disorder can occur du ring adolescence or young adulthood, but in
other individuals it manifests during middle  or even older adulthood. Generally, gam-
bling disorder develops over the course of years, although the progression appears to be
more rapid in females than in males. Most  individuals who develop a gambling disorder
evidence a pattern of gambling that gradually  increases in both frequency and amount of
wagering. Certainly, milder fo rms can develop into more severe cases. Most individuals
with gambling disorder report that one or tw o types of gambling are most problematic for
them, although some individuals participate in  many forms of gambling. Individuals are
likely to engage in certain types of gambling (e.g., buying scratch tickets daily) more fre-
quently than others (e.g., playing slot machin es or blackjack at the casino weekly). Fre-
quency of gambling can be related more to the type of gambling than to the severity of the
overall gambling disorder. For example, purcha sing a single scratch ticket each day may
not be problematic, while less frequent casino , sports, or card gambling may be part of a
gambling disorder. Similarly, amounts of money spent wagering  are not in themselves in-
dicative of gambling disorder. Some individuals can wager thousands of dollars per
month and not have a problem with gambling, while others may wager much smaller
amounts but experience substantia l gambling-related difficulties. 
Gambling patterns may be regular or episod ic, and gambling disorder can be persis-
tent or in remission. Gambling can increase during periods of stress or depression and
during periods of substance use or abstinen ce. There may be periods of heavy gambling
and severe problems, times of total abstin ence, and periods of nonproblematic gambling.
Gambling disorder is some times associated with  spontaneous, long-term remissions.
Nevertheless, some individual s underestimate their vulner ability to develop gambling
disorder or to return to gamb ling disorder following remission. When in a period of re-
mission, they may incorrectly assume that th ey will have no problem regulating gambling
and that they may gamble on some forms no nproblematically, only to experience a return
to gambling disorder. 
Early expression of gambling disorder is mo re common among males than among fe-
males. Individuals who begin gambling in yo uth often do so with family members or
588 Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders
friends. Development of early-life gambling diso rder appears to be associated with impul-
sivity and substance abuse. Many high scho ol and college students who develop gambling
disorder grow out of the disorder over time , although it remains a lifelong problem for
some. Mid- and later-life onse t of gambling disorder is more common among females than
among males. 
There are age and gender variations in the type of gambling activities and the preva-
lence rates of gambling disorder. Gambling d isorder is more common among younger and
middle-age persons than among older adults . Among adolescents and young adults, the
disorder is more prevalent in males than in females. Younger indivi duals prefer different
forms of gambling (e.g., sports betting), while older adults are more likely to develop
problems with slot machine and bingo gamblin g. Although the proportions of individuals
who seek treatment for gambling disorder ar e low across all age groups, younger individ-
uals are especially unlikely to present for treatment. 
Males are more likely to begin gambling earlie r in life and to have a younger age at on-
set of gambling disorder than females, who ar e more likely to begin gambling later in life
and to develop gambling disorder in a shorte r time frame. Females with gambling disor-
der are more likely than males with gambling disorder to have depressive, bipolar, and
anxiety disorders. Females also have a later age at onset of the disorder and seek treatment
sooner, although rates of treatment seekin g are low (<10%) among individuals with gam-
bling disorder regardless of gender. 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Gambling that begins in childhood or early adolescence is associated
with increased rates of gambling disorder. Gambling disorder also appears to aggregate
with antisocial personality disorder, depre ssive and bipolar disorders, and other sub-
stance use disorders, particul arly with alcohol disorders. 
Genetic and physiological. Gambling disorder can aggregate in families, and this effect
appears to relate to both environmental and genetic factors. Gambling problems are more
frequent in monozygotic than in dizygotic twins. Gambling disorder is also more preva-
lent among first-degree relati ves of individuals with modera te to severe alcohol use dis-
order than among the general population.
Course modifiers. Many individuals, including adolesce nts and young adults, are likely to
resolve their problems with gambling disorder over time, although a strong predictor of
future gambling problems is  prior gambling problems.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Individuals from specific cultures and races/ethnicities are more likely to participate in
some types of gambling activities than others (e.g., pai gow, cockfights , blackjack, horse rac-
ing). Prevalence rates of gambling disorder are higher among African Americans than
among European Americans, with rates for Hi spanic Americans similar to those of Euro-
pean Americans. Indigenous populations have high prevalence rates of gambling disorder. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Males develop gambling disorder at higher rates than females, alth ough this gender gap
may be narrowing. Males tend to wager on di fferent forms of gambling than females, with
cards, sports, and horse race gambling more prevalent among males, and slot machine and
bingo gambling more common among females.
Gambling Disorder 589
Functional Consequences  of Gambling Disorder
Areas of psychosocial, health, and mental heal th functioning may be adversely affected by
gambling disorder. Specifically, individuals with  gambling disorder may, because of their
involvement with gambling, jeopardize or lo se important relationships with family mem-
bers or friends. Such problems may occur from repeatedly lying to others to cover up the
extent of gambling or from requesting money that is used for gambling or to pay off gam-
bling debts. Employment or educational activities may likewise be adversely impacted by
gambling disorder; absenteeism or poor work or school performance can occur with gam-
bling disorder, as individuals may gamble duri ng work or school h ours or be preoccupied
with gambling or its adverse co nsequence when they should be working or studying. In-
dividuals with gambling disorder  have poor general health and utilize medical services at
high rates. 
Differential Diagnosis
Nondisordered gambling. Gambling disorder must be distinguished from professional
and social gambling. In professional gambling , risks are limited and discipline is central.
Social gambling typically occurs with friends or colleagues and lasts for a limited period of
time, with acceptable losses. Some individu als can experience problems associated with
gambling (e.g., short-term chasin g behavior and loss of control) that do not meet the full
criteria for gambling disorder. 
Manic episode. Loss of judgment and excessive gambling may occur during a manic ep-
isode. An additional diagnosis of gambling d isorder should be given only if the gambling
behavior is not better explained by manic ep isodes (e.g., a histor y of maladaptive gam-
bling behavior at times other than during a manic episode). Alternatively, an individual
with gambling disorder may, during a period of gambling, exhibit behavior that resembles
a manic episode, but once the individual is away from the gambling, these manic-like fea-
tures dissipate.
Personality disorders. Problems with gambling  may occur in individuals with antisocial
personality disorder and other personality disorders. If the criteria are met for both disor-
ders, both can be diagnosed. 
Other medical conditions. Some patients taking dopaminergic medications (e.g., for
Parkinson‘s disease) may expe rience urges to gamble. If such symptoms dissipate when
dopaminergic medications are reduced in dosag e or ceased, then a diagnosis of gambling
disorder would not be indicated. 
Comorbidity
Gambling disorder is associated with poor general health. In addition, some specific med-
ical diagnoses, such as tachycardia and an gina, are more common among individuals with
gambling disorder than in the general popula tion, even when other substance use disor-
ders, including tobacco use disorder, are cont rolled for. Individuals with gambling disor-
der have high rates of comorbidity with ot her mental disorders, such as substance use
disorders, depressive d isorders, anxiety disorders, and personality disorders. In some in-
dividuals, other mental disorders may preced e gambling disorder and be either absent or
present during the manifestat ion of gambling disorder. Gamb ling disorder may also occur
prior to the onset of other ment al disorders, especially anxi ety disorders and substance use
disorders. 
This page intentionally left blank 