265Trauma- and
 Stressor-Related Disorders
Trauma- and stressor-related  disorders include disorders in which exposure to
a traumatic or stressful event is listed explicitly  as a diagnostic criterion. These include reactive
attachment disorder, disinhibit ed social engagement disorder , posttraumatic stress disor-
der (PTSD), acute stress disorder, and adjustment disorders. Placement of this chapter reflects
the close relationship between these diagnoses and disorders in the surrounding chapters on
anxiety disorders, obsessive-c ompulsive and related disorder s, and dissociative disorders.
Psychological distress following exposure to a traumatic or stressful event is quite vari-
able. In some cases, symptoms  can be well understood with in an anxiety- or fear-based
context. It is clear, however, that many in dividuals who have been exposed to a traumatic
or stressful event exhibit a phenotype in which,  rather than anxiety- or fear-based symp-
toms, the most prominent clin ical characteristics are anhedonic and dysphoric symptoms,
externalizing angry and aggressive symptoms, or  dissociative symptoms. Because of these
variable expressions of clinic al distress following exposure  to catastrophic or aversive
events, the aforementioned di sorders have been grouped under a separate category:
trauma- and stressor-related disorders. Furthermore, it is not uncommon for the clinical pic-
ture to include some combination of the ab ove symptoms (with or without anxiety- or
fear-based symptoms). Such a heterogeneous picture has long been recognized in adjust-
ment disorders, as well. Social  neglect—that is, the absence of adequate caregiving during
childhood—is a diagnostic requirement of both reactive attachment disorder and disin-
hibited social engagement diso rder. Although the two disord ers share a common etiology,
the former is expressed as an internalizing di sorder with depressive symptoms and with-
drawn behavior, while the latter is marked by  disinhibition and externalizing behavior.
Reactive Attachment Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 313.89 (F94.1)
A. A consistent pattern of inhibited, emotionally withdrawn behavior toward adult caregiv-
ers, manifested by both of the following:
1. The child rarely or minimally seeks comfort when distressed.
2. The child rarely or minimally responds to comfort when distressed.
B. A persistent social and emotional disturbance c haracterized by at least two of the following:
1. Minimal social and emotional responsiveness to others.
2. Limited positive affect.
3. Episodes of unexplained irritability, sadness, or fearfulness that are evident even
during nonthreatening interactions with adult caregivers.
C. The child has experienced a pattern of extremes of insufficient care as evidenced by
at least one of the following:
1. Social neglect or deprivation in the form of persistent lack of having basic emotional
needs for comfort, stimulation, and affection met by caregiving adults.
266 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
2. Repeated changes of primary caregivers that limit opportunities to form stable at-
tachments (e.g., frequent changes in foster care).
3. Rearing in unusual settings that severely limit opportunities to form selective at-
tachments (e.g., institutions with high child-to-caregiver ratios).
D. The care in Criterion C is presumed to be responsible for the disturbed behavior in Cri-
terion A (e.g., the disturbances in Criterion A began following the lack of adequate care
in Criterion C).
E. The criteria are not met for autism spectrum disorder.
F. The disturbance is evident before age 5 years.
G. The child has a developmental age of at least 9 months.
Specify if:
Persistent:  The disorder has been present for more than 12 months.
Specify current severity: 
Reactive attachment disorder is specified as severe  when a child exhibits all symp-
toms of the disorder, with each symptom manifesting at relatively high levels.
Diagnostic Features
Reactive attachment disorder of infancy or early childhood is characterized by a pattern of
markedly disturbed and develo pmentally inappropriate attachment behaviors, in which a
child rarely or minimally turns preferentially to an attachment figure  for comfort, support,
protection, and nurturance. The essential featur e is absent or grossly underdeveloped at-
tachment between the child and putative caregiving adults. Children with reactive attach-
ment disorder are believed to have the capa city to form selective attachments. However,
because of limited opportunitie s during early development, they  fail to show the behavioral
manifestations of select ive attachments. That is, when di stressed, they show no consistent
effort to obtain comfort, support, nurturance, or protection from caregivers. Furthermore,
when distressed, children with this disorder do not respond more than minimally to com-
forting efforts of caregivers. Thus, the disord er is associated with th e absence of expected
comfort seeking and response to comforting behaviors. As such, children with reactive
attachment disorder show dimi nished or absent expression of positive emotions during
routine interactions with caregivers. In addi tion, their emotion regulation capacity is com-
promised, and they displa y episodes of negative emotions of fear, sadness, or irritability
that are not readily explained. A diagnosis of reactive attachment disorder should not be
made in children who are developmentally unab le to form se lective attachments. For this
reason, the child must have a develo pmental age of at least 9 months.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Because of the shared etiologica l association with social negl ect, reactive attachment dis-
order often co-occurs with developmental dela ys, especially in delays in cognition and
language. Other associated features include stereotypies and other signs of severe neglect
(e.g., malnutrition or signs of poor care). 
Prevalence
The prevalence of reactive atta chment disorder is unknown, bu t the disorder is seen rela-
tively rarely in clinical settings. The disorder has been found in young children exposed to
severe neglect before being placed in foster care or raised in  institutions. However, even in
populations of seve rely neglected children, the disord er is uncommon, occurring in less
than 10% of such children.
Reactive Attachment Disorder 267
Development and Course
Conditions of social neglect are often present in the first months of life in children diag-
nosed with reactive attachment disorder, even before the disorder is diagnosed. The clin-
ical features of the disorder manifest in a similar fashion between the ages of 9 months and
5 years. That is, signs of absent-to-minima l attachment behaviors and associated emotion-
ally aberrant behaviors are evident in childre n throughout this age range, although differ-
ing cognitive and motor abilities may affect how these behaviors ar e expressed. Without
remediation and recovery through normative care giving environments, it appears that signs
of the disorder may persist, at least for several years.
It is unclear whether reactive attachment disorder occurs in older children and, if so, how
it differs from its presentation in young ch ildren. Because of this, the diagnosis should be
made with caution in children older than 5 years.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Serious social neglect is a diagnost ic requirement for reactive attach-
ment disorder and is also the only known risk factor for the disorder. However, the ma-
jority of severely neglecte d children do not develop the disorder. Prognosis appears to
depend on the quality of the caregiving  environment following serious neglect. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
Similar attachment behaviors have been described in young children in many different
cultures around the world. Ho wever, caution should be exercised in making the diagnosis
of reactive attachment disorder in cultures  in which attachment has not been studied.
Functional Consequences of 
Reactive Attachment Disorder
Reactive attachment disorder significantly impairs young children’s abilities to relate in-
terpersonally to adults or peer s and is associated with functional impairment across many
domains of early childhood.
Differential Diagnosis
Autism spectrum disorder. Aberrant social behaviors mani fest in young children with
reactive attachment disorder, but they also ar e key features of auti sm spectrum disorder.
Specifically, young children with either co ndition can manifest dampened expression of
positive emotions, cognitive and language delays, and impairments in social reciprocity.
As a result, reactive attachment disorder must  be differentiated from  autism spectrum dis-
order. These two disorders can be distinguished based on differential histories of neglect
and on the presence of restricted interests or ritualized behaviors, specific deficit in social
communication, and selective attachment beha viors. Children with reactive attachment
disorder have experienced a history of severe so cial neglect, although it is not always pos-
sible to obtain detailed historie s about the precise nature of th eir experiences, especially in
initial evaluations. Children with autistic spec trum disorder will only rarely have a history
of social neglect. The restricted interests an d repetitive behaviors ch aracteristic of autism
spectrum disorder are not a feature of reactive attachment disorder. These clinical features
manifest as excessive adherenc e to rituals and routines; restricted, fixated interests; and
unusual sensory reactions. However, it is important to note that children with either con-
dition can exhibit stereotypic behaviors such as rocking or flapping. Children with either
disorder also may exhibit a range of intellectual functioning, but only children with autis-
268 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
tic spectrum disorder exhibit selective impa irments in social communicative behaviors,
such as intentional communication (i.e., im pairment in communication that is deliberate,
goal-directed, and aimed at influencing the be havior of the recipient). Children with reac-
tive attachment disorder show social commu nicative functioning comparable to their
overall level of intellectual functioning. Fina lly, children with autistic spectrum disorder
regularly show attachment behavior typical for their develo pmental level. In contrast,
children with reactive attachment disorder do so only rarely or inconsistently, if at all.
Intellectual disability (intell ectual developmental disorder). Developmental delays of-
ten accompany reactive attachment disorder, but they should not be confused with the
disorder. Children with intellectual disability should exhibit social and emotional skills
comparable to their cognitive skills and do  not demonstrate the profound reduction in
positive affect and emotion regula tion difficulties evident in children with reactive attach-
ment disorder. In addition, developmentall y delayed children who have reached a cogni-
tive age of 7–9 months should demonstrate selective attachments regardless of their
chronological age. In contrast , children with reactive attach ment disorder show lack of
preferred attachment despite ha ving attained a developmental age of at least 9 months.
Depressive disorders. Depression in young children is also associated with reductions
in positive affect. There is limited evidence, ho wever, to suggest that  children with depres-
sive disorders have impairments in attachment . That is, young children who have been di-
agnosed with depressive disord ers still should seek and resp ond to comforting efforts by
caregivers.
Comorbidity
Conditions associated with neglect, includin g cognitive delays, language delays, and ste-
reotypies, often co-occur with reactive atta chment disorder. Medical conditions, such as
severe malnutrition, may accompany signs of the disorder. Depressive symptoms also
may co-occur with reactive attachment disorder. 
Disinhibited Social Engagement Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 313.89 (F94.2)
A. A pattern of behavior in which a child actively approaches and interacts with unfamiliar
adults and exhibits at least two of the following:
1. Reduced or absent reticence in approaching and interacting with unfamiliar adults.
2. Overly familiar verbal or physical behavior (that is not consistent with culturally
sanctioned and with age-appropriate social boundaries).
3. Diminished or absent checking back with adult caregiver after venturing away, even
in unfamiliar settings.
4. Willingness to go off with an unfamiliar adult with minimal or no hesitation.
B. The behaviors in Criterion A are not limited to impulsivity (as in attention-deficit/hyper-
activity disorder) but include socially disinhibited behavior. 
C. The child has experienced a pattern of extremes of insufficient care as evidenced by
at least one of the following:
1. Social neglect or deprivation in the form of persistent lack of having basic emotional
needs for comfort, stimulation, and affection met by caregiving adults.
2. Repeated changes of primary caregivers that limit opportunities to form stable at-
tachments (e.g., frequent changes in foster care).
3. Rearing in unusual settings that severely limit opportunities to form selective at-
tachments (e.g., institutions with high child-to-caregiver ratios).
Disinhibited Social Engagement Disorder 269
D. The care in Criterion C is presumed to be responsible for the disturbed behavior in Cri-
terion A (e.g., the disturbances in Criterion A began following the pathogenic care in
Criterion C).
E. The child has a developmental age of at least 9 months.
Specify if:
Persistent:  The disorder has been present for more than 12 months.
Specify current severity:
Disinhibited social engagement disorder is specified as severe  when the child exhibits
all symptoms of the disorder, with each symptom manifesting at relatively high levels.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of disinhibited social en gagement disorder is a pattern of behavior
that involves culturally inappropriate, overl y familiar behavior with relative strangers
(Criterion A). This overly familiar behavior violat es the social boundaries of the culture. A
diagnosis of disinhibited social engagement d isorder should not be made before children
are developmentally able to form selective attachments. For this reason, the child must
have a developmental age of at least 9 months.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Because of the shared etiological association with social neglect, disinhibited social en-
gagement disorder may co-occu r with developmental delays, especially cognitive and lan-
guage delays, stereotypies, and other signs of severe neglect, such as malnutrition or poor
care. However, signs of the disorder often per sist even after these other signs of neglect are
no longer present. Therefore, it is not uncomm on for children with the disorder to present
with no current signs of neglect. Moreover , the condition can present in children who
show no signs of disordered attachment. Th us, disinhibited social engagement disorder
may be seen in children with a history of neglect who lack attach ments or whose attach-
ments to their caregivers range from disturbed to secure. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of disinhibited social attachment disorder is unknown. Nevertheless, the
disorder appears to be rare, occurring in a mi nority of children, even those who have been
severely neglected and subsequently placed in fo ster care or raised in institutions. In such
high-risk populations, the condition occurs in only about 20% of ch ildren. The condition is
seen rarely in other clinical settings. 
Development and Course
Conditions of social neglect are often present in the first months of life in children diag-
nosed with disinhibited social engagement di sorder, even before the disorder is diag-
nosed. However, there is no evidence that ne glect beginning after age 2 years is associated
with manifestations of the disorder. If ne glect occurs early and signs of the disorder
appear, clinical features of the disorder are moderately stable over time, particularly if
conditions of neglect pe rsist. Indiscriminate social behavior and lack of reticence with un-
familiar adults in toddlerhood are accompan ied by attention-seeking behaviors in pre-
schoolers. When the disorder persists into middle childhood, clinical features manifest as
verbal and physical overfamiliarity as well as  inauthentic expression of emotions. These
signs appear particularly apparent when the child interacts with adults. Peer relationships
are most affected in adolescence, with both  indiscriminate behavior and conflicts appar-
ent. The disorder has not been described in adults.
270 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
Disinhibited social engagement disorder ha s been described from  the second year of
life through adolescence. There are some differences in manifestations of the disorder
from early childhood through adolescence. At  the youngest ages, across many cultures,
children show reticenc e when interacting with strangers. Young children with the disorder
fail to show reticence to approach, engage with, and even accompany adults. In preschool
children, verbal and social intrusiveness appear most prominent, often accompanied by
attention-seeking behavior. Ve rbal and physical overfamiliarity continue through middle
childhood, accomp anied by inauthentic expressions of  emotion. In adolescence, indis-
criminate behavior extends to peers. Relative to healthy adolescents, adolescents with the
disorder have more “superficial” peer relationships and more peer conflicts. Adult man-
ifestations of the disorder are unknown.
Risk and Prognostic Factors 
Environmental. Serious social neglect is a diagnost ic requirement for disinhibited social
engagement disorder and is also the only know n risk factor for the disorder. However, the
majority of severely neglected children do not develop the disorder . Neurobiological vul-
nerability may differentiate neglected childr en who do and do not develop the disorder.
However, no clear link with any specific neur obiological factors has been established. The
disorder has not been identified in children who experience social neglect only after age
2 years. Prognosis is only mode stly associated with quality of the caregiving environment
following serious neglect. In many cases, th e disorder persists, even in children whose
caregiving environment be comes markedly improved.
Course modifiers. Caregiving quality seems to moderate the course of disinhibited so-
cial engagement disorder. Nevertheless, ev en after placement in normative caregiving
environments, some children show persistent signs of the disorder, at least through ado-
lescence. 
Functional Consequences of 
Disinhibited Social Engagement Disorder
Disinhibited social engagement disorder significantly impairs young children’s abilities to
relate interpersonally to adults and peers.
Differential Diagnosis
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Because of social impulsivity that sometimes
accompanies attention-deficit/hyperactivity di sorder (ADHD), it is necessary to differ-
entiate the two disorders. Children with disi nhibited social engagement disorder may be
distinguished from those with ADHD because th e former do not show difficulties with at-
tention or hyperactivity. 
Comorbidity
Limited research has examined the issue of disorders comorbid with disinhibited social
engagement disorder. Conditions associated with neglect, including cognitive delays,
language delays, and stereotypies, may co-occu r with disinhibited social engagement dis-
order. In addition, children may be diagnosed with ADHD and disinhibited social engage-
ment disorder concurrently. 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 271
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 309.81 (F43.10)
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 
Note:  The following criteria apply to adults, adolescents, and children older than 6 years.
For children 6 years and younger, see corresponding criteria below.
A. Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one (or
more) of the following ways:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others.
3. Learning that the traumatic event(s) occurre d to a close family member or close
friend. In cases of actual or threatened death of a family member or friend, the
event(s) must have been violent or accidental.
4. Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the traumatic
event(s) (e.g., first responders collecting human remains; police officers repeatedly
exposed to details of child abuse).
Note:  Criterion A4 does not apply to exposur e through electronic media, television,
movies, or pictures, unless this exposure is work related.
B. Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associated with the
traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive dist ressing memories of the traumatic event(s).
Note:  In children older than 6 years, repetitive play may occur in which themes or
aspects of the traumatic event(s) are expressed.
2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream are
related to the traumatic event(s).
Note:  In children, there may be frightening dreams without recognizable content.
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual feels or acts as if
the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a continuum,
with the most extreme expression being a complete loss of awareness of present
surroundings.)
Note:  In children, trauma-specific reenactment may occur in play.
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external cues
that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
5. Marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or re-
semble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
C. Persistent avoidance of stimuli associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning after
the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by one or both of the following:
1. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about
or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
2. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid external reminders (people, places, conversations,
activities, objects, situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts, or feel-
ings about or closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
D. Negative alterations in cognitions and mood associated with the traumatic event(s),
beginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or
more) of the following:
1. Inability to remember an important aspect of the trauma tic event(s) (typically due to dis-
sociative amnesia and not to other factors such as head injury, alcohol, or drugs).
272 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
2. Persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others,
or the world (e.g., “I am bad,” “No one can be trusted,” “The world is completely
dangerous,” “My whole nervous system is permanently ruined”).
3. Persistent, distorted cognitions about the cause or consequences of the traumatic
event(s) that lead the individual to blame himself/herself or others.
4. Persistent negative emotional state (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, or shame).
5. Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities.
6. Feelings of detachment or estrangement from others.
7. Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g., inability to experience
happiness, satisfaction, or loving feelings).
E. Marked alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic event(s), be-
ginning or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or
more) of the following:
1. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically ex-
pressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects.
2. Reckless or self-destructive behavior.
3. Hypervigilance.
4. Exaggerated startle response.
5. Problems with concentration.
6. Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep or restless sleep).
F. Duration of the disturbance (Criteria B, C, D, and E) is more than 1 month.
G. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
H. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
medication, alcohol) or another medical condition.
Specify whether:
With dissociative symptoms:  The individual’s symptoms meet the criteria for post-
traumatic stress disorder, and in addition, in response to the stressor, the individual ex-
periences persistent or recurrent symptoms of either of the following:
1.Depersonalization:  Persistent or recurrent experiences of feeling detached from,
and as if one were an outside observer of, one’s mental processes or body (e.g.,
feeling as though one were in a dream; feeling a sense of unreality of self or body
or of time moving slowly).
2.Derealization:  Persistent or recurrent experiences of unreality of surroundings
(e.g., the world around the individual is experienced as unreal, dreamlike, distant,
or distorted).
Note:  To use this subtype, the dissociative symptoms must not be attributable to the
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., blackouts, behavior during alcohol intoxica-
tion) or another medical condition (e.g., complex partial seizures).
Specify if:
With delayed expression:  If the full diagnostic criteria are not met until at least 6 months
after the event (although the onset and expression of some symptoms may be immediate).
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder for Children 6 Years and Younger
A. In children 6 years and younger, exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury,
or sexual violence in one (or more) of the following ways:
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others, especially primary care-
givers.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 273
Note:  Witnessing does not include events that are witnessed only in electronic me-
dia, television, movies, or pictures.
3. Learning that the traumatic event(s) o ccurred to a parent or caregiving figure.
B. Presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associated with the
traumatic event(s), beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic
event(s).
Note:  Spontaneous and intrusive memories may not necessarily appear distress-
ing and may be expressed as play reenactment.
2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream are
related to the traumatic event(s).
Note:  It may not be possible to ascertain that the frightening content is related to
the traumatic event.
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the child feels or acts as if the
traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a continuum, with
the most extreme expression being a complete loss of awareness of present sur-
roundings.) Such trauma-specific reenactment may occur in play.
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external cues
that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s).
5. Marked physiological reactions to reminders of the traumatic event(s).
C. One (or more) of the following symptoms, representing either persistent avoidance of
stimuli associated with the traumatic event(s) or negative alterations in cognitions and
mood associated with the traumatic event(s), must be present, beginning after the
event(s) or worsening after the event(s):
Persistent Avoidance of Stimuli
1. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid activities, places, or physical reminders that arouse
recollections of the traumatic event(s).
2. Avoidance of or efforts to avoid people, conversations, or interpersonal situations
that arouse recollections of the traumatic event(s).
Negative Alterations in Cognitions
3. Substantially increased frequency of negative emotional states (e.g., fear, guilt,
sadness, shame, confusion).
4. Markedly diminished interest or participation in significant activities, including con-
striction of play.
5. Socially withdrawn behavior.
6. Persistent reduction in expression of positive emotions.
D. Alterations in arousal and reactivity associated with the traumatic event(s), beginning
or worsening after the traumatic event(s) occurred, as evidenced by two (or more) of
the following:
1. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation) typically ex-
pressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects (including ex-
treme temper tantrums).
2. Hypervigilance.
3. Exaggerated startle response.
4. Problems with concentration.
5. Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep or restless sleep).
E. The duration of the disturbance is more than 1 month.
274 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
F. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in relationships
with parents, siblings, peers, or other caregivers or with school behavior.
G. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
medication or alcohol) or another medical condition.
Specify whether:
With dissociative symptoms:  The individual’s symptoms meet the criteria for post-
traumatic stress disorder, and the individual experiences persistent or recurrent symp-
toms of either of the following:
1.Depersonalization:  Persistent or recurrent experiences of feeling detached from,
and as if one were an outside observer of, one’s mental processes or body (e.g.,
feeling as though one were in a dream; feeling a sense of unreality of self or body
or of time moving slowly).
2.Derealization:  Persistent or recurrent experiences of unreality of surroundings
(e.g., the world around the individual is experienced as unreal, dreamlike, distant,
or distorted).
Note:  To use this subtype, the dissociative symptoms must not be attributable to the
physiological effects of a substance (e.g., blackouts) or another medical condition
(e.g., complex partial seizures).
Specify if:
With delayed expression: If the full diagnostic criteria are not met until at least
6 months after the event (although the onset and expression of some symptoms may
be immediate).
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is the development of char-
acteristic symptoms following exposure to one or more tr aumatic events. Emotional re-
actions to the traumatic event (e.g., fear, he lplessness, horror) are no longer a part of
Criterion A. The clinical presentation of PTSD  varies. In some individuals, fear-based re-
experiencing, emotional, and behavioral sy mptoms may predominate. In others, anhe-
donic or dysphoric mood states and negative cognitions may be most distressing. In some
other individuals, arousal an d reactive-externalizing symptoms are prominent, while in
others, dissociative symptoms predominate. Finally, some individuals exhibit combina-
tions of these symptom patterns. 
The directly experienced traumatic events in  Criterion A include, but are not limited
to, exposure to war as a combatant or civilian,  threatened or actual physical assault (e.g.,
physical attack, robbery, mugging, childhood phy sical abuse), threatened or actual sexual
violence (e.g., forced sexual penetration, al cohol/drug-facilitated se xual penetration, abu-
sive sexual contact, noncontact sexual abuse,  sexual trafficking), being kidnapped, being
taken hostage, terrorist attack, torture, incarc eration as a prisoner of war, natural or hu-
man-made disasters, and severe motor vehicle accidents. For children, sexually violent
events may include developmentally inapprop riate sexual experiences without physical
violence or injury. A life-threatening illness or debilitating medical condition is not neces-
sarily considered a traumatic event. Medical in cidents that qualify as traumatic events in-
volve sudden, catastrophic ev ents (e.g., waking during su rgery, anaphylactic shock).
Witnessed events include, but are not limited to, observing threatened  or serious injury,
unnatural death, physical or sexual abuse of another person due to violent assault, domes-
tic violence, accident, war or di saster, or a medical catastrophe  in one’s child (e.g., a life-
threatening hemorrhage). Indirect exposure th rough learning about an event is limited to
experiences affecting close relatives or friend s and experiences that are violent or acciden-
tal (e.g., death due to natural causes does no t qualify). Such events include violent per-
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 275
sonal assault, suicide, serious accident, and se rious injury. The disorder may be especially
severe or long-lasting when the stressor is interpersonal and intentiona l (e.g., torture, sex-
ual violence). 
The traumatic event can be reexperienced in various ways. Commonly, the individual
has recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive recollect ions of the event (Criterion B1). Intrusive
recollections in PTSD are distinguished from depressive rumination in that they apply
only to involuntary and intrusive distressing memories. The emphasis is on recurrent
memories of the event that us ually include sensory, emotiona l, or physiological behavioral
components. A common reexperiencing symptom is distressing dreams that replay the
event itself or that are representative or th ematically related to th e major threats involved
in the traumatic event (Criterion B2). The in dividual may experience dissociative states
that last from a few seconds to several hours or even days , during which components of
the event are relived and the individual behaves as if the event were occurring at that mo-
ment (Criterion B3). Such events occur on a continuum from brief vi sual or other sensory
intrusions about part of the traumatic event wi thout loss of reality or ientation, to complete
loss of awareness of present surroundings. These episodes, often re ferred to as “flash-
backs,” are typically brief but can be associ ated with prolonged distress and heightened
arousal. For young children, reenactment of events related to trauma may appear in play
or in dissociative states. Intense psychological distress (Criterion B4) or physiological re-
activity (Criterion B5) often occurs when the individual is exposed to triggering events that
resemble or symbolize an aspect of the trauma tic event (e.g., windy days after a hurricane;
seeing someone who resembles one’s perpetrator). The trigge ring cue could be a physical
sensation (e.g., dizziness for survivors of head trauma; rapid heartbeat for a previously
traumatized child), particularly for indivi duals with highly somatic presentations.
Stimuli associated with the trauma are pers istently (e.g., always or almost always)
avoided. The individual commonly makes delib erate efforts to avoid thoughts, memories,
feelings, or talking about the traumatic event (e .g., utilizing distraction techniques to avoid
internal reminders) (Criterion C1) and to av oid activities, objects, situations, or people
who arouse recollections of it (Criterion C2).
Negative alterations in cognitions or mood associated with the event begin or worsen
after exposure to the event. These negative al terations can take various forms, including an
inability to remember an important aspect of the traumatic event; such amnesia is typically
due to dissociative amnesia and is not due to he ad injury, alcohol, or drugs (Criterion D1).
Another form is persistent (i.e., always or almost always) and exaggerated negative ex-
pectations regarding important aspects of life a pplied to oneself, others, or the future (e.g.,
“I have always had bad judgment”; “People in  authority can’t be trusted”) that may man-
ifest as a negative change in perceived identi ty since the trauma (e.g., “I can’t trust anyone
ever again”; Criterion D2). Individuals with PTSD may have persistent erroneous cogni-
tions about the causes of the traumatic event that lead them to blame themselves or others
(e.g., “It’s all my fault that my uncle abused me”) (Criterion D3). A persistent negative
mood state (e.g., fear, horror, anger, guilt, shame) either began or worsened after exposure
to the event (Criterion D4). The individual may experience markedly diminished interest
or participation in previously enjoyed activities (C riterion D5), feeling detached or es-
tranged from other people (Criterion D6), or a persiste nt inability to feel positive emotions
(especially happiness, joy, satisfaction, or em otions associated with intimacy, tenderness,
and sexuality) (Criterion D7).
Individuals with PTSD may be quick temp ered and may even engage in aggressive
verbal and/or physical behavior with little or  no provocation (e.g., yelling at people, get-
ting into fights, destroying objects) (Criterion E1). They may also engage in reckless or self-
destructive behavior such as dangerous drivin g, excessive alcohol or drug use, or self-
injurious or suicidal behavior (Criterion E2).   PTSD is often characterized by a heightened
sensitivity to potential threats,  including t hose that are related to the traumatic experience
(e.g., following a motor vehicle accident, being especially sensitive to the threat potentially
276 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
caused by cars or trucks) and those not relate d to the traumatic event (e.g., being fearful of
suffering a heart attack) (Criterion E3). Individuals with PTSD may be very reactive to un-
expected stimuli, displaying a heightened startle response, or jumpiness, to loud noises or
unexpected movements (e.g., jumping markedly in response to a telephone ringing) (Cri-
terion E4). Concentration difficulties, includ ing difficulty remembering daily events (e.g.,
forgetting one’s telephone numb er) or attending to focused t asks (e.g., following a conver-
sation for a sustained period of time), are commonly reported (Criterion E5). Problems
with sleep onset and maintenance are commo n and may be associated with nightmares
and safety concerns or with generalized elevated  arousal that interferes with adequate sleep
(Criterion E6). Some in dividuals also experien ce persistent dissociative symptoms of de-
tachment from their bodies (depersonalization) or the world around them (derealization);
this is reflected in the “with di ssociative symptoms” specifier.
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Developmental regression, such as loss of la nguage in young children, may occur. Audi-
tory pseudo-hallucinations, such as having  the sensory experience of hearing one’s
thoughts spoken in one or more different voic es, as well as paranoid ideation, can be pres-
ent. Following prolonged, repeated, and seve re traumatic events (e.g., childhood abuse,
torture), the individual may additionally experi ence difficulties in regulating emotions or
maintaining stable interpersonal relationship s, or dissociative symptoms. When the trau-
matic event produces violent death, symptoms of both problematic bereavement and PTSD
may be present. 
Prevalence
In the United States, projected lifetime risk for PTSD using DS M-IV criteria at age 75 years
is 8.7%. Twelve-month prevalence among U.S. adults is about 3.5%. Lower estimates are
seen in Europe and most Asian, African, an d Latin American countries, clustering around
0.5%–1.0%. Although different groups have di fferent levels of exposure to traumatic
events, the conditional probability of developi ng PTSD following a similar level of expo-
sure may also vary across cultural groups. Rates of PTSD are higher among veterans and
others whose vocation increases the risk of tr aumatic exposure (e.g., police, firefighters,
emergency medical personnel). Highest rates (r anging from one-third to more than one-
half of those exposed) are found among surv ivors of rape, military combat and captivity,
and ethnically or politically motivated intern ment and genocide. The prevalence of PTSD
may vary across development; children and adolescents, including preschool children,
generally have displayed lower prevalence following exposure to serious traumatic
events; however, this may be because previo us criteria were insufficiently developmen-
tally informed. The prevalence of full-thresh old PTSD also appears to be lower among
older adults compared with the general popu lation; there is eviden ce that subthreshold
presentations are more common th an full PTSD in later life and that these symptoms are
associated with substantial clinical impairme nt. Compared with U.S. non-Latino whites,
higher rates of PTSD have been reported among U.S. Latinos, African Americans, and
American Indians, and lower rates have been reported among Asian Americans, after ad-
justment for traumatic exposu re and demographic variables.
Development and Course
PTSD can occur at any age, beginning after th e first year of life. Symptoms usually begin
within the first 3 months after the trauma, although there may be a delay of months, or
even years, before criteria for the diagnosis  are met. There is abundant evidence for what
DSM-IV called “delayed onset” but is now call ed “delayed expression,” with the recogni-
tion that some symptoms typically appear immediately and that the delay is in meeting
full criteria.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 277
Frequently, an individual’s reaction to a tr auma initially meets cr iteria for acute stress
disorder in the immediate aftermath of the trauma. The symptoms of PTSD and the rela-
tive predominance of different symptoms may vary over time. Duration of the symptoms
also varies, with complete recovery within 3 months occurring in approximately one-half
of adults, while some individuals remain symptomatic for longer  than 12 months and
sometimes for more than 50 years. Symptom recurrence and intens ification may occur in
response to reminders of the original trauma, ongoing life stressors, or newly experienced
traumatic events. For older individuals, dec lining health, worsening cognitive function-
ing, and social isolation ma y exacerbate PTSD symptoms.
The clinical expression of reexperiencing can vary across development. Young children
may report new onset of frightening dreams wi thout content specific to the traumatic event.
Before age 6 years (see criteria for preschool su btype), young children are more likely to ex-
press reexperiencing symptoms through play th at refers directly or symbolically to the
trauma. They may not manifest fe arful reactions at the time of the exposure or during reex-
periencing. Parents may report a wide range of  emotional or behavioral changes in young
children. Children may focus on imagined interventions in their play or storytelling. In ad-
dition to avoidance, children  may become preoccupied with reminders. Because of young
children’s limitations in expressing thoughts or labeling emotions, negative alterations in
mood or cognition tend to involve primarily mood changes. Children may experience co-
occurring traumas (e.g., physical abuse, witnes sing domestic violence) and in chronic cir-
cumstances may not be able to identify onset of symptomatology. Avoidant behavior may
be associated with restricted play or explor atory behavior in youn g children; reduced par-
ticipation in new activities in school-age children; or reluctance to pursue developmental op-
portunities in adolescents (e.g ., dating, driving). Older children and adolescents may judge
themselves as cowardly. Adolescents may harb or beliefs of being changed in ways that
make them socially undesirable and estrange them from peers (e.g., “Now I’ll never fit in”)
and lose aspirations for the future. Irritable or aggressive behavior in children and adoles-
cents can interfere with peer relationships and sch ool behavior. Reckless behavior may lead
to accidental injury to self or  others, thrill-seeking, or high-risk behaviors. Individuals who
continue to experience PTSD into older ad ulthood may express fe wer symptoms of hy-
perarousal, avoidance, and ne gative cognitions and mood compared with younger adults
with PTSD, although adults ex posed to traumatic events duri ng later life may display more
avoidance, hyperarousal, sleep problems, and crying spells than do younger adults exposed
to the same traumatic events. In older individu als, the disorder is associated with negative
health perceptions, primary care ut ilization, and suicidal ideation.
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Risk (and protective) factors are generally divided into pretraumatic , peritraumatic, and
posttraumatic factors. 
Pretraumatic factors
Temperamental. These include childhood emotional prob lems by age 6 years (e.g., prior
traumatic exposure, externalizing or anxiety problems) and prior me ntal disorders (e.g.,
panic disorder, depressive disorder, PTSD, or obsessive-compulsive disorder [OCD]).
Environmental. These include lower socioeconomic st atus; lower education; exposure to
prior trauma (especially during  childhood); childhood adversity (e.g., economic depriva-
tion, family dysfunction, parental separation or  death); cultural charac teristics (e.g., fatal-
istic or self-blaming coping strategies); lower intelligence; minority racial/ethnic status;
and a family psychiatric history. Social suppo rt prior to event exposure is protective.
Genetic and physiological. These include female gender and younger age at the time of
trauma exposure (for adults). Certain genotypes may either be  protective or increase risk
of PTSD after exposure  to traumatic events. 
278 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
Peritraumatic factors
Environmental. These include severity (dose) of th e trauma (the greater the magnitude
of trauma, the greater the likelihood of PTSD), perceived life threat, personal injury, in-
terpersonal violence (particularly trauma pe rpetrated by a caregiver or involving a wit-
nessed threat to a caregiver in children), and,  for military personnel, being a perpetrator,
witnessing atrocities, or killing the enemy. Fina lly, dissociation that occurs during the trauma
and persists afterward is a risk factor.
Posttraumatic factors
Temperamental. These include negative appraisals, inappropriate coping strategies,
and development of ac ute stress disorder.
Environmental. These include subsequent exposure to repeated upsetting reminders, subse-
quent adverse life events, and financial or other trauma-related losses. Social support (includ-
ing family stability, for children) is a protecti ve factor that moderate s outcome after trauma. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The risk of onset and severity of PTSD may differ  across cultural groups as a result of vari-
ation in the type of traumatic exposure (e.g., genocide), the impact on disorder severity of
the meaning attributed to the tr aumatic event (e.g., inability to  perform funerary rites after
a mass killing), the ongoing so ciocultural context (e.g., re siding among unpunished per-
petrators in postconflict settings), and other cultural factors (e.g., acculturative stress in
immigrants). The relative risk for PTSD of particular exposures (e .g., religious persecu-
tion) may vary across cultural groups. The clin ical expression of the symptoms or symp-
tom clusters of PTSD may vary culturally, particularly with respect to avoidance and
numbing symptoms, distressing dreams, and somatic symptoms (e.g., dizziness, short-
ness of breath, heat sensations).
Cultural syndromes and idioms of distress influence the expression of PTSD and the
range of comorbid disorders in  different cultures by providi ng behavioral and cognitive
templates that link traumatic exposures to specific symptoms. For example, panic attack
symptoms may be salient in PTSD among Cambodians and Latin Americans because of
the association of traumatic exposure with panic-like khyâl attacks and ataque de nervios.
Comprehensive evaluation of local expression s of PTSD should include assessment of cul-
tural concepts of distress (see the chapter “Cultural Formulation” in Section III).
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
PTSD is more prevalent among females than among males across the lifespan. Females in
the general population experience PTSD for a longer duration than do males. At least some
of the increased risk for PTSD in females appe ars to be attributable  to a greater likelihood
of exposure to traumatic events, such as rape, and other forms of interpersonal violence.
Within populations exposed specifically to such  stressors, gender differences in risk for
PTSD are attenuated or nonsignificant.
Suicide Risk
Traumatic events such as childhood abuse increa se a person’s suicide risk. PTSD is associated
with suicidal ideation and suicide attempts, an d presence of the disorder may indicate which
individuals with ideation even tually make a suicide plan or actually attempt suicide.
Functional Consequences of 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
PTSD is associated with high levels of social , occupational, and physical disability, as well
as considerable economic costs and high leve ls of medical utilization. Impaired function-
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder 279
ing is exhibited across social, interpersonal, develo pmental, educational, physical health,
and occupational domains. In community and veteran samples, PTSD is associated with
poor social and family relationships, absent eeism from work, lower income, and lower ed-
ucational and occupational success.
Differential Diagnosis
Adjustment disorders. In adjustment disorders, the st ressor can be of any severity or
type rather than that required by PTSD Crit erion A. The diagnosis of an adjustment dis-
order is used when the response to a stressor that meets PTSD Criterion A does not meet
all other PTSD criteria (or criteria for another mental disorder). An adjustment disorder is
also diagnosed when the symptom pattern of PTSD occurs in response to a stressor that
does not meet PTSD Criterion A (e .g., spouse leaving, being fired).
Other posttraumatic diso rders and conditions. Not all psychopathology that occurs in
individuals exposed to an extreme stressor sh ould necessarily be attributed to PTSD. The
diagnosis requires that trauma exposure prec ede the onset or exacer bation of pertinent
symptoms. Moreover, if the symptom response pattern to the extreme stressor meets cri-
teria for another mental disorder, these diagnoses should be given instead of, or in addi-
tion to, PTSD. Other diagnoses and conditions are excluded if they are better explained by
PTSD (e.g., symptoms of panic disorder that  occur only after exposure to traumatic re-
minders). If severe, symptom response patter ns to the extreme stressor may warrant a sep-
arate diagnosis (e.g., dissociative amnesia). 
Acute stress disorder. Acute stress disorder is distin guished from PTSD because the
symptom pattern in acute stress disorder is restricted to a duration of 3 days to 1 month
following exposure to  the traumatic event.
Anxiety disorders and obsessive-compulsive disorder. In OCD, there are recurrent
intrusive thoughts, but these meet the definition  of an obsession. In addition, the intrusive
thoughts are not related to an experienced traumatic event, compulsions are usually pres-
ent, and other symptoms of PTSD or acute stre ss disorder are typically absent. Neither the
arousal and dissociative symptoms of panic di sorder nor the avoidance, irritability, and
anxiety of generalized anxiety disorder are associated with a specific traumatic event. The
symptoms of separation anxiety disorder are clearly related to separation from home or
family, rather than to a traumatic event.
Major depressive disorder. Major depression may or may not be preceded by a trau-
matic event and should be diagnosed if othe r PTSD symptoms are absent. Specifically, ma-
jor depressive disorder does not include any PTSD Criterion B or C symptoms. Nor does it
include a number of symptoms from PTSD Criterion D or E.
Personality disorders. Interpersonal difficulties that had their onset, or were greatly ex-
acerbated, after exposure to a traumatic event may be an indica tion of PTSD, rather than a
personality disorder, in which such difficulties would be expected independently of any
traumatic exposure.
Dissociative disorders. Dissociative amnesia, dissociative identity disorder, and de-
personalization-derealization disorder may or may not be preceded by exposure to a trau-
matic event or may or may not have co-occurri ng PTSD symptoms. When full PTSD criteria
are also met, however, the PTSD “with dissoci ative symptoms” subtype should be considered.
Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder). New onset of somatic
symptoms within the context of posttraumati c distress might be an indication of PTSD
rather than conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder).
Psychotic disorders. Flashbacks in PTSD must be di stinguished from illusions, halluci-
nations, and other perceptual disturbances that may occur in schizophrenia, brief psy-
chotic disorder, and other psychotic disord ers; depressive and bipolar disorders with
280 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
psychotic features; delirium; substance/medication-induced disorders; and psychotic dis-
orders due to another medical condition. 
Traumatic brain injury. When a brain injury occurs in the context of a traumatic event (e.g.,
traumatic accident, bomb blast, acceleration/d eceleration trauma), symptoms of PTSD may
appear. An event causing head trauma may also  constitute a psychological traumatic event,
and tramautic brain injury (TBI)–related neurocognitive symptoms are not mutually exclusive
and may occur concurrently. Sy mptoms previously termed postconcussive  (e.g., headaches,
dizziness, sensitivity to light or  sound, irritability, concentration deficits) can occur in brain-
injured and non-brain-injured populations, in cluding individuals with PTSD. Because symp-
toms of PTSD and TBI-related neurocognitive symptoms can overlap, a differential diagnosis
between PTSD and neurocognitive disorder sy mptoms attributable to TBI may be possible
based on the presence of symptoms that are di stinctive to each presentation. Whereas reexpe-
riencing and avoidance are characteristic of PTSD  and not the effects of TBI, persistent disori-
entation and confusion are more specific to TBI (neurocognitive effects) than to PTSD.
Comorbidity
Individuals with PTSD are 80% more likely than those without PTSD to have symptoms
that meet diagnostic criteria for at least one other mental disorder (e.g., depressive, bipo-
lar, anxiety, or substance use disorders). Comorbid substance use disorder and conduct
disorder are more common among males than  among females. Among U.S. military per-
sonnel and combat veterans who have been de ployed to recent wars  in Afghanistan and
Iraq, co-occurrence of PTSD and mild TBI is  48%. Although most  young children with
PTSD also have at least one other diagnosis, the patterns of comorbidity are different than
in adults, with oppositional defiant disorder  and separation anxiety disorder predominat-
ing. Finally, there is considerable comorb idity between PTSD and major neurocognitive
disorder and some overlapping sy mptoms between these disorders.
Acute Stress Disorder
Diagnostic Criteria 308.3 (F43.0)
A. Exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violation in one (or
more) of the following ways: 
1. Directly experiencing the traumatic event(s).
2. Witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others.
3. Learning that the event(s) occurred to a close family member or close friend.  Note:
In cases of actual or threatened death of a family member or friend, the event(s)
must have been violent or accidental.
4. Experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the traumatic
event(s) (e.g., first responders collecting human remains, police officers repeatedly
exposed to details of child abuse).
Note: This does not apply to exposure through electronic media, television, mov-
ies, or pictures, unless this exposure is work related.
B. Presence of nine (or more) of the following symptoms from any of the five categories
of intrusion, negative mood, dissociation, avoidance, and arousal, beginning or wors-
ening after the traumatic event(s) occurred:
Intrusion Symptoms
1. Recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic
event(s).  Note: In children, repetitive play may occur in which themes or aspects of
the traumatic event(s) are expressed.
Acute Stress Disorder 281
2. Recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream are
related to the event(s). Note: In children, there may be frightening dreams without
recognizable content.
3. Dissociative reactions (e.g., flashbacks) in which the individual feels or acts as if
the traumatic event(s) were recurring. (Such reactions may occur on a continuum,
with the most extreme expression being a complete loss of awareness of present
surroundings.) Note:  In children, trauma-specific reenactment may occur in play.
4. Intense or prolonged psychological distress or marked physiological reactions in re-
sponse to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of the
traumatic event(s).
Negative Mood
5. Persistent inability to experience positive emotions (e.g., inability to experience
happiness, satisfaction, or loving feelings).
Dissociative Symptoms
6. An altered sense of the reality of one’s surroundings or oneself (e.g., seeing oneself
from another’s perspective, bein g in a daze, time slowing).
7. Inability to remember an important aspect of the traumatic event(s) (typically due to
dissociative amnesia and not to other factors such as head injury, alcohol, or
drugs).
Avoidance Symptoms
8. Efforts to avoid distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or closely asso-
ciated with the traumatic event(s).
9. Efforts to avoid external reminders (peopl e, places, conversations, activities, ob-
jects, situations) that arouse distressing memories, thoughts, or feelings about or
closely associated with the traumatic event(s).
Arousal Symptoms
10. Sleep disturbance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep, restless sleep).
11. Irritable behavior and angry outbursts (with little or no provocation), typically ex-
pressed as verbal or physical aggression toward people or objects.
12. Hypervigilance.
13. Problems with concentration.
14. Exaggerated startle response.
C. Duration of the disturbance (symptoms in Criterion B) is 3 days to 1 month after trauma
exposure.
Note: Symptoms typically begin immediately after the trauma, but persistence for at
least 3 days and up to a month is needed to meet disorder criteria.
D. The disturbance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other important areas of functioning.
E. The disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g.,
medication or alcohol) or another medical c ondition (e.g., mild traumatic brain injury)
and is not better explained by brief psychotic disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The essential feature of acute stress disorder  is the development of characteristic symp-
toms lasting from 3 days to 1 month following exposure to one or more traumatic events.
Traumatic events that are expe rienced directly include, but are not limited to, exposure
to war as a combatant or civilia n, threatened or actual violen t personal assault (e.g., sexual
282 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
violence, physical attack, active combat, mugging, childhood physical and/or sexual vio-
lence, being kidnapped, being taken hostage, terrorist attack, tortur e), natural or human-
made disasters (e.g., earthquake, hurricane, airplane crash), and severe accident (e.g.,
severe motor vehicle, industrial accident). For children, sexually traumatic events may
include inappropriate sexual experiences with out violence or injury. A life-threatening
illness or debilitating medical condition is no t necessarily consider ed a traumatic event.
Medical incidents that qualify as traumatic even ts involve sudden, cata strophic events (e.g.,
waking during surgery, anaphylactic shock). St ressful events that do not possess the severe
and traumatic components of ev ents encompassed by Criterion A may lead to an adjust-
ment disorder but not to  acute stress disorder.
The clinical presentation of acute stress disorder may vary by individual but typically
involves an anxiety response that includes some  form of reexperiencing of or reactivity to
the traumatic event. In some individuals, a dissociative or detached presentation can pre-
dominate, although these individuals typically  will also display strong emotional or phys-
iological reactivity in response to trauma re minders. In other individuals, there can be a
strong anger response in which reactivity is characterized by irritable or possibly aggres-
sive responses. The full symptom picture must be  present for at least 3 days after the trau-
matic event and can be diagnosed only up to 1 month after the event. Symptoms that occur
immediately after the event but resolve in less than 3 days would not meet criteria for
acute stress disorder.
Witnessed events include, but are not limited  to, observing threatened or serious in-
jury, unnatural death, physical or sexual violence inflicted on another individual as a re-
sult of violent assault, severe domestic violen ce, severe accident, war, and disaster; it may
also include witnessing a medical catastrophe (e.g., a life-threatening hemorrhage) involv-
ing one’s child. Events experienced indirectly  through learning about the event are limited
to close relatives or close friends. Such even ts must have been violent or accidental—death
due to natural causes does not qualify—and in clude violent personal assault, suicide, se-
rious accident, or serious injury. The disorder may be especially severe when the stressor
is interpersonal and intentional (e .g., torture, rape). The like lihood of developing this dis-
order may increase as the intensity of and physical proximity to the stressor increase.
The traumatic event can be reexperienced in various wa ys. Commonly, the individual
has recurrent and intrusive recollections of the event (Criterion B1). The recollections are
spontaneous or triggered recurrent memories of the event that usua lly occur in response
to a stimulus that is reminiscent of the traumatic experience (e.g., the sound of a backfiring
car triggering memories of gunshots). Thes e intrusive memories often include sensory
(e.g., sensing the intense heat that was percei ved in a house fire), emotional (e.g., experi-
encing the fear of believing that one was about  to be stabbed), or physiological (e.g., expe-
riencing the shortness of breath that one su ffered during a near-drowning) components.
Distressing dreams may contain themes that are representative of or thematically re-
lated to the major threats involved in the trau matic event. (For example, in the case of a
motor vehicle accident surviv or, the distressing dreams may involve crashing cars gener-
ally; in the case of a combat soldier, the distressing dreams may involve being harmed in
ways other than combat.)
Dissociative states may last from a few seco nds to several hours, or even days, during
which components of the event are relived an d the individual behaves as though experi-
encing the event at that moment. While disso ciative responses are common during a trau-
matic event, only dissociative responses that  persist beyond 3 days after trauma exposure
are considered for the diagnosis of acute st ress d isord er. For youn g children, reenactment
of events related to trauma may appear in  play and may include dissociative moments
(e.g., a child who survives a motor vehicle accident may repe atedly crash toy cars during
play in a focused and distressing manner).  These episodes, often referred to as flashbacks,
are typically brief but involve a sense that th e traumatic event is oc curring in the present
rather than being remembered in the past and are associated with significant distress.
Acute Stress Disorder 283
Some individuals with the disorder do not ha ve intrusive memories of the event itself,
but instead experience intense psychological distress or physiological reactivity when
they are exposed to triggering events that re semble or symbolize an aspect of the traumatic
event (e.g., windy days for child ren after a hurricane, entering an elevator for a male or fe-
male who was raped in an elevator, seeing  someone who resembles one’s perpetrator).
The triggering cue could be a physical sensation (e.g., a sense of heat for a burn victim, diz-
ziness for survivors of head tr auma), particularly for individuals with highly somatic pre-
sentations. The individual may have a persistent  inability to feel positive emotions (e.g.,
happiness, joy, satisfaction, or emotions asso ciated with intimacy, tenderness, or sexual-
ity) but can experience negative emotions su ch as fear, sadness, anger, guilt, or shame.
Alterations in awareness can include depersonalization,  a detached sense of oneself (e.g.,
seeing oneself from the other side of the room), or derealization,  having a distorted view of
one’s surroundings (e.g., perceiving that thin gs are moving in slow motion, seeing things
in a daze, not being aware of events that on e would normally encode ). Some individuals
also report an inability to remember an impo rtant aspect of the tr aumatic event that was
presumably encoded. This symp tom is attributable to dissoc iative amnesia and is not at-
tributable to head inju ry, alcohol, or drugs.
Stimuli associated with the trauma are persistently avoided. The individual may refuse
to discuss the traumatic experience or may engage in avoidance strategies to minimize
awareness of emotional reactions (e.g., excessive alcohol use when reminded of the ex-
perience). This behavioral avoidance may include avoiding watching news coverage of
the traumatic experience, refusing to return to a workplace where the trauma occurred, or
avoiding interacting with others who shared the same traumatic experience.
It is very common for indivi duals with acute stress disorder to experience problems
with sleep onset and maintenance, which may be associated with nightmares or with gen-
eralized elevated arou sal that prevents adequate sleep. Individuals with acute stress dis-
order may be quick tempered and may even en gage in aggressive verbal and/or physical
behavior with little provocation. Acute stress disorder is often characterized by a height-
ened sensitivity to potential th reats, including those that are related to the traumatic ex-
perience (e.g., a motor vehicle accident vict im may be especially sensitive to the threat
potentially caused by any cars or trucks) or those not related to the traumatic event (e.g.,
fear of having a heart attack). Concentration difficulties, including difficulty remembering
daily events (e.g., forg etting one’s telephone number) or attending to focused tasks (e.g.,
following a conversation for a sustained period  of time), are commonly reported. Individ-
uals with acute stress disorder may be very re active to unexpected stimuli, displaying a
heightened startle response or jumpiness to loud noises or unexpe cted movements (e.g.,
the individual may jump markedly in the response to a telephone ringing). 
Associated Features Supporting Diagnosis
Individuals with acute stress disorder common ly engage in catastrophic or extremely neg-
ative thoughts about thei r role in the traumatic event, th eir response to the traumatic ex-
perience, or the likelihood of future harm. For example, an individual with acute stress
disorder may feel excessively guilty about not having prevented the traumatic event or
about not adapting to the experience more su ccessfully. Individuals with acute stress dis-
order may also interpret their symptoms in  a catastrophic manner, such that flashback
memories or emotional numbing may be interpreted as a sign of diminished mental ca-
pacity. It is common for individuals with acute stress disorder to experience panic attacks
in the initial month after trauma exposure th at may be triggered by trauma reminders or
may apparently occur spontaneously. Addition ally, individuals with acute stress disorder
may display chaotic or impulsive behavior. For example, individuals may drive reck-
lessly, make irrational decisions, or gamble  excessively. In children, there may be sig-
nificant separation anxiety, possibly mani fested by excessive needs for attention from
284 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
caregivers. In the case of be reavement following a death that occurred in traumatic cir-
cumstances, the symptoms of acute stress di sorder can involve acute grief reactions. In
such cases, reexperiencing, dissociative, an d arousal symptoms ma y involve reactions to
the loss, such as intrusive memories of the ci rcumstances of the individual’s death, disbe-
lief that the individual has died, and ange r about the death. Po stconcussive symptoms
(e.g., headaches, dizziness, sensitivity to light or sound, irritability, concentration deficits),
which occur frequently following  mild traumatic brain injury, are also frequently seen in
individuals with acute stress disorder. Po stconcussive symptoms are equally common in
brain-injured and non–brain-injured populations, and the frequent occurrence of postcon-
cussive symptoms could be attributable  to acute stress disorder symptoms. 
Prevalence
The prevalence of acute stress disorder in recently trauma-exposed populations (i.e.,
within 1 month of trauma exposure) varies ac cording to the nature of the event and the
context in which it is assessed. In both U.S. and non-U.S. population s, acute stress disorder
tends to be identified in less than 20% of ca ses following traumatic events that do not in-
volve interpersonal assault; 13%–21% of motor vehicle accidents, 14% of mild traumatic
brain injury, 19% of assault, 10% of severe burns, and 6%–12% of industrial accidents.
Higher rates (i.e., 20%–50%) are reported following interpersonal traumatic events, in-
cluding assault, rape, and witnessing a mass shooting. 
Development and Course
Acute stress disorder cannot be diagnosed un til 3 days after a traumatic event. Although
acute stress disorder may prog ress to posttraumatic stress di sorder (PTSD) after 1 month,
it may also be a transient stress response th at remits within 1 month of trauma exposure
and does not result in PTSD. Approximately half of individuals who eventually develop
PTSD initially present with acute stress diso rder. Symptom worsenin g during the initial
month can occur, often as a result of ongoin g life stressors or further traumatic events. 
The forms of reexperiencing can vary acro ss development. Unlike adults or adoles-
cents, young children may report frightening dreams without content that clearly reflects
aspects of the trauma (e.g., waki ng in fright in the aftermath of the trauma but being unable
to relate the content of the dream to the traumatic event). Ch ildren age 6 years and younger
are more likely than older children to expres s reexperiencing symptoms through play that
refers directly or symbolically to the trauma. For example, a very young child who sur-
vived a fire may draw pictures of flames. Yo ung children also do not necessarily manifest
fearful reactions at the time of the exposure or even during reexperiencing. Parents typi-
cally report a range of emotional expressions,  such as anger, shame, or withdrawal, and
even excessively bright positiv e affect, in young children who are traumatized. Although
children may avoid reminders of the trauma, they sometimes become preoccupied with
reminders (e.g., a young child bitten by a dog may talk about dogs constantly yet avoid go-
ing outside because of fear of coming into contact with a dog). 
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Temperamental. Risk factors include prior mental diso rder, high levels of negative af-
fectivity (neuroticism), greater perceived seve rity of the traumatic event, and an avoidant
coping style. Catastrophic appraisals of th e traumatic experience, often characterized by
exaggerated appraisals of future harm, guilt, or hopelessness, are strongly predictive of
acute stress disorder. 
Environmental. First and foremost, an individual must  be exposed to a traumatic event to
be at risk for acute stress disorder. Risk fact ors for the disorder include a history of prior
trauma.
Acute Stress Disorder 285
Genetic and physiological. Females are at greater risk for developing acute stress dis-
order.
Elevated reactivity, as reflected by acousti c startle response, prior to trauma exposure
increases the risk for developing acute stress disorder. 
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The profile of symptoms of acute stress disorder may vary cross-culturally, particularly
with respect to dissociative symptoms, ni ghtmares, avoidance, and somatic symptoms
(e.g., dizziness, shortness of breath, heat se nsations). Cultural sy ndromes and idioms of
distress shape the local symptom profiles of acute stress disorder. Some cultural groups
may display variants of dissociative response s, such as possession or trancelike behaviors
in the initial month after trauma exposure. Pa nic symptoms may be salient in acute stress
disorder among Cambodians because of the as sociation of traumatic exposure with panic-
like khyâl  attacks, and ataque de nervios  among Latin Americans may also follow a traumatic
exposure. 
Gender-Related Diagnostic Issues
Acute stress disorder is more prevalent am ong females than among males. Sex-linked neu-
robiological differences in stre ss response may contribute to females’ increased risk for
acute stress disorder. The increased risk for the disorder in females may be attributable in
part to a greater likelihood of exposure to th e types of traumatic events with a high con-
ditional risk for acute stress  disorder, such as rape and other interpersonal violence. 
Functional Consequences of Acute Stress Disorder
Impaired functioning in social, interpersona l, or occupational domains has been shown
across survivors of accidents, assault, and rape  who develop acute stress disorder. The ex-
treme levels of anxiety that may be associa ted with acute stress disorder may interfere
with sleep, energy levels, and capacity to a ttend to tasks. Avoidance in acute stress dis-
order can result in generalized withdrawal from many situations that are perceived as
potentially threatening, which can lead to nonattendance of medical appointments, avoid-
ance of driving to important appointments, and absenteeism from work. 
Differential Diagnosis
Adjustment disorders. In acute stress disorder, the stress or can be of any severity rather
than of the severity and type required by Criterion A of acute stress di sorder. The diagnosis of
an adjustment disorder is used when the response to a Criterion A event does not meet the cri-
teria for acute stress disorder (o r another specific mental diso rder) and when the symptom pat-
tern of acute stress disorder occurs in response to a stressor that does not meet Criterion A for
exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual  violence (e.g., spouse leaving,
being fired). For example, severe  stress reactions to life-threate ning illnesses that may include
some acute stress disorder symptoms may be more appropriately desc ribed as an adjustment
disorder. Some forms of acute stress response do not include acute stress disorder symptoms
and may be characterized by anger, depression, or guilt. These responses are more appro-
priately described as primarily an adjustment disorder. Depressive or anger responses in an
adjustment disorder may involve rumination ab out the traumatic event, as opposed to invol-
untary and intrusive distressing memories in acute stress disorder.
Panic disorder. Spontaneous panic attacks are very common in acute stress disorder.
However, panic disorder is diagnosed only if panic attacks are unexpected and there is
anxiety about future attacks or  maladaptive changes in behavior associated with fear of
dire consequences of the attacks. 
286 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
Dissociative disorders. Severe dissociative responses (i n the absence of characteristic
acute stress disorder symptoms) may be di agnosed as derealization/depersonalization
disorder. If severe amnesia of the trauma persists in the ab sence of characteristic acute
stress disorder symptoms, the diagnosis of  dissociative amnesia may be indicated.
Posttraumatic stress disorder. Acute stress disorder is dist inguished from PTSD because
the symptom pattern in acute stre ss disorder must occur within 1 month of the traumatic event
and resolve within that 1-month period. If th e symptoms persist for more than 1 month and
meet criteria for PTSD, the diagnosis is ch anged from acute stre ss disorder to PTSD.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder. In obsessive-compulsive diso rder, there are recurrent
intrusive thoughts, but these meet the definition  of an obsession. In addition, the intrusive
thoughts are not related to an experienced traumatic event, compulsions are usually pres-
ent, and other symptoms of acute st ress disorder are typically absent.
Psychotic disorders. Flashbacks in acute stress disorder  must be distinguished from il-
lusions, hallucinations, and other perceptual disturbances that may occur in schizophre-
nia, other psychotic disorders, depressive or  bipolar disorder with psychotic features, a
delirium, substance/medication -induced disorders, and psychotic disorders due to an-
other medical condition. Acut e stress disorder flashbacks ar e distinguished from these
other perceptual disturbances by being direct ly related to the traumatic experience and by
occurring in the absence of other psychotic or substance-induced features.
Traumatic brain injury. When a brain injury occurs in the context of a traumatic event
(e.g., traumatic accident, bomb blast, acceleration/deceleration trauma), symptoms of
acute stress disorder may appear. An event causing head trauma may also constitute a
psychological trau matic event, and tramautic brain injury (TBI)–related neurocognitive
symptoms are not mutually exclusive and ma y occur concurrently. Symptoms previously
termed postconcussive  (e.g., headaches, dizziness, sensitiv ity to light or sound, irritability,
concentration deficits) can occur in brain-injured and non–brain injured populations, in-
cluding individuals with acute stress disorder . Because symptoms of acute stress disorder
and TBI-related neurocognitive symptoms can overlap, a differential diagnosis between
acute stress disorder and neurocognitive di sorder symptoms attributable to TBI may be
possible based on the presence of symptoms that are distinctive to each presenta-
tion. Whereas reexperiencing and avoidance are characteristic of acut e stress disorder and
not the effects of TBI, persistent disorientation  and confusion are more specific to TBI (neu-
rocognitive effects) than to acute stress disord er. Furthermore, differential is aided by the
fact that symptoms of acute stress disorder persist for up to only 1 month following trauma
exposure.
Adjustment Disorders
Diagnostic Criteria
A. The development of emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to an identifiable
stressor(s) occurring within 3 months of the onset of the stressor(s).
B. These symptoms or behaviors are clinically significant, as evidenced by one or both of
the following:
1. Marked distress that is out of proportion to the severity or intensity of the stressor,
taking into account the external context and the cultural factors that might influence
symptom severity and presentation.
2. Significant impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
C. The stress-related disturbance does not meet  the criteria for another mental disorder
and is not merely an exacerbation of a preexisting mental disorder.
Adjustment Disorders 287
D. The symptoms do not represent normal bereavement.
E. Once the stressor or its consequences have terminated, the symptoms do not persist
for more than an additional 6 months.
Specify whether:
309.0 (F43.21) With depressed mood:  Low mood, tearfulness, or feelings of hope-
lessness are predominant.
309.24 (F43.22) With anxiety:  Nervousness, worry, jitteriness, or separation anxiety
is predominant.
309.28 (F43.23) With mixed anxiety and depressed mood:  A combination of de-
pression and anxiety is predominant.
309.3 (F43.24) With disturbance of conduct:  Disturbance of conduct is predominant.
309.4 (F43.25) With mixed disturba nce of emotions and conduct:  Both emotional
symptoms (e.g., depression, anxiety) and a disturbance of conduct are predominant.
309.9 (F43.20) Unspecified:  For maladaptive reactions that are not classifiable as one
of the specific subtypes of adjustment disorder.
Diagnostic Features
The presence of emotional or behavioral sympto ms in response to an identifiable stressor
is the essential feature of adju stment disorders (Criterion A) . The stressor may be a single
event (e.g., a termination of a romantic relati onship), or there may be multiple stressors
(e.g., marked business difficulties and marita l problems). Stressors may be recurrent (e.g.,
associated with seasonal busi ness crises, unfulfilling sexual relationships) or continuous
(e.g., a persistent painful illness with increasi ng disability, living in a crime-ridden neigh-
borhood). Stressors may affect a single individual, an entire family, or a larger group or
community (e.g., a natural disaster). Some st ressors may accompany specific developmen-
tal events (e.g., going to school, leaving a parental home, reentering a parental home, get-
ting married, becoming a parent, failing to attain occupational goals, retirement). 
Adjustment disorders may be diagnosed follo wing the death of a loved one when the
intensity, quality, or persis tence of grief reactions exceeds what normally might be ex-
pected, when cultural, religious, or age-appr opriate norms are taken into account. A more
specific set of bereavement-relate d symptoms has been designated persistent complex be-
reavement disorder.
Adjustment disorders are associated with an increased risk of suicide attempts and
completed suicide.
Prevalence
Adjustment disorders ar e common, although prevalence may vary widely as a function of
the population studied and the assessment me thods used. The percentage of individuals
in outpatient mental health treatment with a principal diagnosis of an adjustment disorder
ranges from approximately 5% to 20%. In a hospital psychiatric consultation setting, it is
often the most common diagno sis, frequently reaching 50%. 
Development and Course
By definition, the disturbance in adjustment disorders begins within  3 months of onset of
a stressor and lasts no longer than 6 months  after the stressor or its consequences have
ceased. If the stressor is an acute event (e.g., being fired from a job), the onset of the dis-
turbance is usually immediate (i.e., within a few days) and the durati on is relatively brief
(i.e., no more than a few mont hs). If the stressor or its co nsequences persist, the adjustment
disorder may also continue to be pr esent and become the persistent form.
288 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
Risk and Prognostic Factors
Environmental. Individuals from disadvantaged lif e circumstances experience a high
rate of stressors and may be at increased risk for adjustment disorders.
Culture-Related Diagnostic Issues
The context of the individual’s cultural setting should be taken into account in making the
clinical judgment of whether the individual’s response to the stressor is maladaptive or
whether the associated distress is in excess of what would be expected. The nature, mean-
ing, and experience of the stressors and the ev aluation of the response to the stressors may
vary across cultures. 
Functional Consequences of Adjustment Disorders
The subjective distress or impa irment in functioning associat ed with adjustment disorders
is frequently manifested as decreased perf ormance at work or school and temporary
changes in social relationships. An adjustment disorder may complicate the course of ill-
ness in individuals who have a general medica l condition (e.g., decreased compliance with
the recommended medical regimen; incr eased length of hospital stay). 
Differential Diagnosis
Major depressive disorder. If an individual has symptoms that meet criteria for a major
depressive disorder in response  to a stressor, the diagnosis of an adjustment disorder is
not applicable. The symptom profile of major depressive disorder differentiates it from ad-
justment disorders.
Posttraumatic stress disorder and acute stress disorder. In adjustment disorders, the
stressor can be of any severity rather than of  the severity and type required by Criterion A
of acute stress disorder and posttraumatic st ress disorder (PTSD). In distinguishing ad-
justment disorders from thes e two posttraumatic diagnoses,  there are both timing and
symptom profile considerations. Adjustment disorders can be diagnosed immediately
and persist up to 6 months afte r exposure to the traumatic event, whereas acute stress dis-
order can only occur between 3 days and 1 month of exposure to the stressor, and PTSD
cannot be diagnosed until at least 1 month has passed since the occurrence of the traumatic
stressor. The required symptom profile for PT SD and acute stress disorder differentiates
them from the adjustment disorders. With re gard to symptom profiles, an adjustment dis-
order may be diagnosed following a traumatic event when an individu al exhibits symptoms
of either acute stress disorder or PTSD that do not meet or exceed the diagnostic threshold
for either disorder. An adjustment disorder should also be diagno sed for individuals who
have not been exposed to a tr aumatic event but who otherwise exhibit the full symptom pro-
file of either acute st ress disorder or PTSD.
Personality disorders. With regard to personality disorders, some personality features
may be associated with a vulnerability to situat ional distress that may resemble an adjust-
ment disorder. The lifetime hist ory of personality functionin g will help inform the in-
terpretation of distressed behaviors to aid in  distinguishing a long-standing personality
disorder from an adjustment d isorder. In addition to some personality disorders incurring
vulnerability to distress, stre ssors may also exacerbate pers onality disorder symptoms. In
the presence of a personality disorder, if the symptom criteria for an adjustment disorder
are met, and the stress-related disturbance exceeds what may be attributable to maladap-
tive personality disorder symptoms (i.e., Crit erion C is met), then the diagnosis of an ad-
justment disorder should be made.
Other Specified Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorder 289
Psychological factors affecting other medical conditions. In psychological factors af-
fecting other medical conditions, specific psychological entities (e.g., psychological symp-
toms, behaviors, other factors) exacerbate  a medical condition. These psychological
factors can precipitate, exacerbate, or put an individual at risk for medical illness, or they
can worsen an existing condition. In contrast, an adjustment disorder is a reaction to the
stressor (e.g., having a medical illness).
Normative stress reactions. When bad things happen, most  people get upset. This is
not an adjustment disorder. The diagnosis should only be made when the magnitude of
the distress (e.g., alterations in mood, anxiet y, or conduct) exceed s what would normally
be expected (which may vary in different cu ltures) or when the adverse event precipitates
functional impairment.
Comorbidity
Adjustment disorders can accompany most mental disorders and an y medical disorder.
Adjustment disorders can be diagnosed in additi on to another mental disorder only if the
latter does not explain the partic ular symptoms that occur in reaction to the stressor. For
example, an individual may develop an adjustment disorder, with depressed mood, after
losing a job and at the same time have a di agnosis of obsessive-co mpulsive disorder. Or,
an individual may have a depressive or bipo lar disorder and an adjustment disorder as
long as the criteria for both are met. Adju stment disorders are common accompaniments
of medical illness and may be the major psychological response to a medical disorder.
Other Specified Trauma- and
Stressor-Related Disorder
309.89 (F43.8)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a trauma- and
stressor-related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,
occupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full
criteria for any of the disorders in the trauma- and stressor-related disorders diagnostic
class. The other specified trauma- and stressor- related disorder category is used in situa-
tions in which the clinician chooses to communicate the specific reason that the presenta-
tion does not meet the criteria for any specific trauma- and stressor-related disorder. This
is done by recording “other specified trauma- and stressor-related disorder” followed by
the specific reason (e.g., “persistent complex bereavement disorder”).
Examples of presentations that can be specified using the “other specified” designation
include the following:
1.Adjustment-like disorders with delayed on set of symptoms that occur more than
3 months after the stressor.
2.Adjustment-like disorders with prolonged duration of more than 6 months with-
out prolonged duration of stressor.
3.Ataque de nervios:  See “Glossary of Cultural Concepts of Distress” in the Appendix.
4.Other cultural syndromes:  See “Glossary of Cultural Concepts of Distress” in the Ap-
pendix.
5.Persistent complex bereavement disorder:  This disorder is characterized by severe
and persistent grief and mourning reactions (see the chapter “Conditions for Further
Study”).
290 Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders
Unspecified Trauma- and
Stressor-Related Disorder
309.9 (F43.9)
This category applies to presentations in which symptoms characteristic of a trauma- and
stressor-related disorder that cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, oc-
cupational, or other important areas of functioning predominate but do not meet the full cri-
teria for any of the disorders in the trauma- and stressor-related disorders diagnostic class.
The unspecified trauma- or stressor-related disord er category is used in  situations in which
the clinician chooses not to specify the reason that the criteria are not met for a specific
trauma- and stressor-related disorder, and includes  presentations in which there is insuffi-
cient information to make a more specific diagnosis (e.g., in emergency room settings).